Dear Mr. President David Malpass!

Dear Mrs. Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva!

Dear ladies and gentlemen, ministers!

Greetings to all present at this historic World Bank session and thank you for the opportunity to address you today.

This Sunday I spoke with Mrs. Kristalina Georgieva and heard very important words from her. Words about our state - about Ukraine. We talked with her in particular about life in our city of Kharkiv. It is the largest city in the east of Ukraine.

Russian troops have been shelling and bombing it for weeks. In those parts of the city where Russian weapons reach, more than a thousand houses have already been destroyed. Russian artillery, Russian missiles, Russian air bombs do not choose who to kill and which buildings to blow up and burn. It is equally dangerous both in the center of Kharkiv and on the outskirts. You can die from Russian shelling everywhere.

But you need to know the people of Kharkiv. You need to know our people... Even during the war, during such shelling, Kharkiv remains a fully functioning city.

Mrs. Kristalina especially noted that in Kharkiv, despite everything, flowers are planted, trees are cultivated, the streets are cleaned now, and the city is generally tidy. That’s what our Kharkiv is like. That’s what our people are like. That’s what our Ukraine is like.

We managed to liberate from the occupiers the cities and communities of three northern regions of Ukraine - Kyiv, Chernihiv and Sumy. We immediately do everything to restore normal life there.

Russian troops have destroyed or damaged tens of thousands of houses in these regions. Almost all social facilities, most of the economically important enterprises of Ukraine have been burned or need to be repaired.

Thousands of people were killed.

We restore electricity, communications, we restore water supply. We restore traffic, set up temporary bridges across rivers instead of destroyed ones. We return social and administrative services. We carry out demining.

Several thousand explosive devices are neutralized daily. These are mines, tripwire mines and shells left over from the Russian military.

Imagine, they mined even ordinary people's homes. Home appliances that they failed to steal and take away. Cars. Basements. They even mined agricultural fields...

But even in such conditions, our people return home. Ukrainians are already trying to do everything to restore normal life. Because that's who we are, Ukrainians.

In the east of our state, in Donbas, in the south the situation is even worse. And right now active hostilities are still going on there. Russia is still trying to develop a new brutal offensive there...

I will cite only one figure now so that you can understand the scale of Ukraine's ordeal, our people's ordeal.

Due to the bombing and shelling by Russian troops in Ukraine, 1,141 educational institutions were destroyed or damaged. Schools, kindergartens, universities. All over our country!

Not every country in the world has as many educational institutions as destroyed by Russian troops in Ukraine.

And if so many educational institutions were destroyed, you can imagine how much else was destroyed. Hospitals, infrastructure, businesses and ordinary houses.

The Russian invasion completely destroyed normal economic relations. The first loss analysis alone yielded approximately $ 550 billion in losses.

Russia has blocked our ports in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. This has significantly reduced Ukrainian exports, including agricultural products. Due to the shortage of Ukrainian food on the world market, the beginning of the crisis is already being felt. A recent report by the UN World Food Program stated that rising food prices this year would lead to starvation of about 47 million people in 81 countries.

Without Ukrainian wheat, corn, vegetable oil and other commodities, this will result not only in physical food shortages in many countries in Africa and Asia, but also in political instability and possibly a new migration crisis. People will look for the culprits of this crisis, in particular, taking to the squares in their countries, in their cities. People will look for ways to escape.

Of course, we do our best to export our products. We launched a sowing campaign this year - as much as possible. But no one in the world can be sure that food security can be guaranteed as long as this war continues - Russia's war on our land.

Stopping the war now and liberating our territory from Russian invaders is the only reliable way to stop the food crisis.

The Russian troops are deliberately destroying all facilities in our country that could provide an economic basis for life. Railway stations, food warehouses, bakery plants, oil terminals, etc...

As of now, given the economic downturn and broken economic ties, we need up to $ 7 billion in financial support each month. Ukraine will need hundreds of billions of dollars to recover from this war. I'm sure each of you has these calculations, I'm sure of it.

We must also honestly say that Russia is accompanying this war against us with aggressive measures on world markets. They specifically create such conditions that there is instability not only in the food market, but also in the fuel market and in the raw materials markets in general.

Russia has provoked rising energy prices in Europe and more broadly in the democratic world. With sufficient export potential, they have constantly held back gas, in particular, to create painful price conditions for European consumers. So that people put pressure on their governments in the middle of the state for the sake of Russia's political interests.

This and many other similar examples show that Russia can no longer be considered a normal and reliable supplier of energy resources, a normal and reliable trading partner.

Together we are able to implement solutions that will not only stop the aggressive intentions of the Russian Federation, not only support Ukraine in this war, but also inevitably show all the potential aggressors of the world that creating problems for other states, for other nations means creating problems for themselves. Because if we do not do this, millions and millions of people in the world will repeatedly suffer from the aggressive actions of individual states.

So, what steps are needed now?

The first is immediate support for Ukraine, so that the Russian leadership knows that the war will not allow them to realize any of their aggressive goals. I am sure that our Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, who are present at this meeting, will talk about the details of such financial support.

We must do everything to ensure that Ukraine and Ukrainians have everything they need to live despite the war. In Kharkiv, which I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, and in all other cities and communities of Ukraine. Everywhere.

Second, Russia must be immediately excluded from all international financial institutions. The IMF, the World Bank and others are definitely not the place for a state that is trying to ruin the lives of its neighbors.

Third, we need a special tax for the war. Russia, and after it any other aggressor, must pay for violating global stability. Such a tax for the war should be imposed on all, without exception, trade transactions with Russia as a state or with Russian companies. On all export-import transactions, all financial transactions that have not yet been blocked.

Funds from the war tax should be used to help Ukraine rebuild everything that Russia destroyed in the war. Or, if this tax is applied to another aggressor, the funds should be directed to the victim of that war.

The world needs an effective tool to respond to the destructive actions of those who do not want to maintain common security and work for the common good of all in the world. I am convinced that a special tax for the war can become such a tool.

Fourth, every country in the world needs to prepare now for the possible complete severance of any relations with Russia. No one should depend on the political mood of the leadership of this state. If the world is ready to isolate Russia completely, the Russian leadership will have a motive to avoid any war.

And fifth, significant assets of the Russian state and representatives of the Russian elite have already been blocked. However, these are not all their assets that we are aware of. This blocking work must be continued. And not just as an end in itself. Russia's blocked funds must be used both to rebuild Ukraine after the war and to compensate for the damage that Russia has caused to other nations with its destructive behavior.

If because of the war unleashed by Russia famine starts in certain regions, or if some countries are substantially affected by inflation, blocked Russian assets could be used to pay for aid and compensation.

We must use all our strength to make Russia feel punishment for this war. And feel how great the need to restore peace is - including for Russia itself.

So by helping us, you can help yourself as well. Stabilize the financial situation in our region and in the world in general. Ensure security in key markets, starting with food.

With your financial support and decisions, we will quickly rebuild our state. And this means not only new opportunities for business from different countries, not only new opportunities for economic growth, but also concrete evidence that global financial institutions are able to work in the interests of ordinary people, in the interests of humanity as a whole.

I want one of the next such meetings to take place in Ukraine. In one of our cities - maybe in Kharkiv - with your support.

Thank you very much for your attention!

Glory to Ukraine!

I am grateful for the opportunity to address you at such a time, the darkest time for our state.

Yesterday, in the town of Borodyanka near our capital, two more graves of civilians killed by the Russian occupiers were found. In one of these graves there are the bodies of two 35-year-old men and a 15-year-old girl. In the second grave there are six people: four men and two women. They were killed when Russian troops controlled Borodyanka. The bodies were buried in the middle of the town, near ordinary houses. Such burials are found in all communities now, in all the cities we liberate from the Russian occupiers.

The world has already remembered the name of the Ukrainian city of Bucha, which is a 20-minute drive from Borodyanka. It remembered the horrible photos of the bodies of those killed just on the streets of Bucha. For weeks, the murdered people have laid on the road, on the sidewalks, near houses.

Russian soldiers did not even try to remove these corpses. And they did not allow, by the way, local residents who remained in the city to bury them.

I'm sure most of you have seen those photos. But in these photos it is far from everything the locals had to go through. The occupiers killed people even for fun and to loot their houses. People were thrown to die in the well. Tortured.

Executed. Grenades were thrown into the basements where people were hiding from shelling. The Russian military killed refugees on the roads. They opened fire on cars with the word "Children" written on them. Hundreds of such riddled and burned cars remained on the roads...

In the Kyiv region alone - and this is as of today, because not all burials have been found yet - the occupiers killed 1,126 Ukrainians. 40 of them are children.

In the Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv and other regions of Ukraine, where Russian troops entered, they caused the same hell as in Borodyanka or Bucha.

Just one example. In the village of Yahidne in the Chernihiv region, the occupiers drove all the villagers into the basement of the school and kept them there for weeks. This is a small village school, a small basement in which about 10 people died of suffocation alone. The youngest child in the basement was 3 months old. Imagine a three month old baby! And the oldest person was 93 years old. And in total there were about 400 people in the basement!

More than three weeks. Day and night they were forbidden to go out of the basement even to the toilet. And when people asked for clothes for children, the occupiers demanded that they sing the Russian national anthem.

That's how the Russian military had fun. This is the impunity they felt. This is what is happening in Ukraine now. In 2022.

We are fighting against Russian troops not just for our state. Not just for independence. But literally for the survival of our people. So that Ukrainians are not executed. So that Ukrainians are not tortured. So that Ukrainians are not raped. And so that Ukrainians are not deported to Russia.

The Russian occupiers have already deported at least 500,000 our citizens from the territory they have occupied. It's like your two cities of Porto. Just imagine that. There were people - and now they are gone. 500 thousand people! This is deportation. This is what the worst totalitarian regimes of the past did.

The deported Ukrainians are deprived of means of communication, everything is taken away from them, even documents. They are distributed to the remote regions of Russia. The occupiers set up special filtration camps to distribute people. Some of those who get there are simply killed. Girls are raped.

Imagine what it's like when a girl escapes from such a Russian filtration camp, and when asked how she did it, she says Russian soldiers simply didn’t like her. Because if they had liked her, she would have been raped and then killed, like many others.

During the 57 days of the full-scale war, we liberated about a thousand settlements of Ukraine, which were captured by Russia, by the invaders. However, the number of occupied cities and communities is much bigger.

Russian troops do not stop shelling and bombing our cities. They are destroying residential areas, any civilian infrastructure that allows cities to maintain normal life. Food warehouses, schools, universities, hospitals, even churches are being blown up.

More than 10 million Ukrainians have been forced to flee their homes due to hostilities. Imagine this number. It's as if the whole of Portugal was forced to flee!

I do not want to call these 10 million Ukrainians refugees. We use the term "displaced persons" to refer to them, these people. We hope that they will all be able to return home when it is safe. But when will it be? And what will be left of their house?

Today, the Russian Defense Minister reported to the Russian leader on the hostilities against our city of Mariupol. You have all heard about Mariupol. Before the war, it was a city comparable in size to Lisbon. It was a half-million seaside city. Now it is completely destroyed. There is not a single undamaged building in Mariupol. Literally scorched city.

For more than a month, the Russian troops have kept Mariupol under siege. Even humanitarian goods were not allowed. Hundreds of thousands of civilians were there without food, without water, without medicine. Under constant shelling, under constant bombing. Russian troops used aircraft to destroy even shelters and they knew for sure that there was no one there but civilians.

Some Mariupol residents managed to escape, and for most of them nothing and no one was left at all. There aren't even photos of their pre-war life - everything was burned.

Tens of thousands of Ukrainians died in the city during Russia's hostilities against Mariupol. We do not even know the exact number of the dead. And we may not find it out. Because Russian troops brought to the city so-called mobile crematoria - special machines for the destruction of human bodies. The occupiers drew conclusions from how the world reacted to the massacre in Bucha. And now the Russians are trying to hide the traces of war crimes.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Portuguese people!

When we turn to the nations of the free world for help, we say simple and clear things. We need weapons to protect ourselves from the brutal Russian invasion, which brought to our people as much evil as the Nazi invasion did 80 years ago.

Leopard tanks, armored personnel carriers, Harpoon anti-ship missiles - you have them and you can help protect the freedom and civilization of Europe with them. Therefore, I appeal to your state to provide us with this assistance.

We need increased pressure of sanctions on Russia, because only sanctions can force Russia to seek peace and deprive the Russian military machine of resources.

We need the principled stance of European companies, so that all of them leave the Russian market, because their taxes, their excise taxes, which they pay to the Russian budget, support this evil.

Why did Russia start the war? The capture of Ukraine is its first step in gaining control of Eastern Europe to destroy democracy in our region.

Ukraine has been and remains the mainstay of democratic processes in our region. The two revolutions of 2004 and 2014, which stopped the dictatorship in Ukraine, in fact defended democracy not only for our nation, but also for all the nations of our region who want to freely choose the future, without any coercion - internal and external.

And your people who will soon celebrate the anniversary of the Carnation Revolution, which freed you from the dictatorship, clearly understand our feelings. Exactly understands the feelings of all other nations of our region who seek freedom.

What does Russia bring to Ukraine? Death and dictatorship. And after Ukraine it will try to bring all this to Moldova, Poland, Georgia, the Baltic states, Kazakhstan and all other countries it can reach. Russia can be stopped. Mass killings, deportation and dictatorship can be stopped. Now, in Ukraine.

I am grateful to your government and to all the Portuguese people for the assistance to Ukraine you have already provided.

For supporting sanctions against Russia. And it is important now, when the European Union is preparing the sixth package of sanctions, that you show your leadership and defend the need for an oil embargo against Russia at the European level. It is also important that you, along with other EU countries, insist on a complete restriction of the Russian banking system.

We need to close all EU ports, all Portuguese ports for Russian ships. In particular, for those that they are trying to hide under other countries’ flags.

I am grateful to you for supporting our people, Ukrainian displaced persons. The Ukrainian and Portuguese people know each other well. They understand each other well. And it is important that you use your opportunities, both in Europe and in other macro-regions of the world, to protect the freedom and right to life of our people.

You can tell the truth about this Russian invasion, about this war against the Ukrainian people, both in South America and in Africa. I ask you to fight Russian propaganda and Russian corrupt influence in the countries that are close to you.

And I believe that the people of Portugal, and with them the Portuguese politicians, will support our state in its fundamental desire to be with you in the European Union. The free must support the free. The decent must support the decent. The conscientious must support the conscientious.

And I believe that you will not betray us or yourself. Because Ukraine is already on its way to the European Union under an accelerated procedure. We hope that in the near future we will be able to obtain the status of a candidate for membership in the European Union.

And when the decision is considered, I ask you to support full membership for Ukraine. Because you on the western edge of Europe and we on the eastern edge of Europe have the same values, the same view of what life should be like on our continent.

Freedom, human rights, the rule of law, equality for every man, for every woman and the opportunity to live freely and without any dictatorship, so that everyone always has the time for happiness and for saudade.

Thank you, Portugal!

Glory to Ukraine!

Free people of the bravest country!

The 56th day of our defense is coming to an end, and today we have definitely become one step closer to peace.

I was glad to welcome in Kyiv a great friend of our state and all Ukrainians - President of the European Council Charles Michel. Each such visit only underscores how absurd Russia's plans to seize our state were.

Three days? Five days? In how many days the occupiers planned to take control of Ukraine? 56 days - and we are meeting our guests in our capital for the sake of our national interests.

I held very thorough talks with Charles Michel on many aspects of relations between Ukraine and the European Union. The main thing is, of course, to protect our state and maintain the stable functioning of all state structures and all institutions. We discussed concrete steps of the European Union to help our country. In particular, defensive, financial and sanctions.

The second major topic of the talks is our movement towards European integration. This is the historic moment when we can develop maximum speed in joining the European Union. We have already proved that the Ukrainian state and public institutions are effective enough to withstand even the test of war. We are already doing as much to protect freedom on the European continent as other nations have never done.

And I see from all our friends in the European Union a willingness to help our movement as much as possible. I thanked Charles for that today.

The third major topic of our talks is the preparation of the necessary steps for the reconstruction of Ukraine after the war. We also discussed what we can do together with the European Union to address the threats to food and energy security in Europe and around the world posed by Russia. Resuming exports of Ukrainian agricultural products and blocking Russia's ability to blackmail Europe with energy resources are top priorities for everyone on the continent.

Before meeting with me, President Charles Michel visited Borodyanka, Kyiv region. He came there not alone, but together with his team. They saw with their own eyes what the occupiers had done on our land. What destruction they had caused. And a correct conclusion was made by our friends: there can be no peace without justice. We will do everything we can to bring to justice every Russian military and commander guilty of war crimes. Modern technology allows you to clarify many details. Every surname, every home address, every bank account - we will find everything.

A Plan to strengthen sanctions against the Russian Federation for the war against our state was published today. This Plan was developed by a team of Ukrainian and international experts led by Andriy Yermak and Michael McFaul.

When all the key areas identified in this Plan are implemented, Russia will lose the opportunity to finance the military machine. In particular, the Plan provides for restrictions on Russia's energy sector, banking sector, export-import operations, transport. The next steps should include an oil embargo and a complete restriction on oil supplies from Russia.

We are also working to ensure that all - I emphasize - all Russian officials who support this shameful war receive a logical sanctions response from the democratic world.

Russia must be recognized as a state - sponsor of terrorism, and the Russian Armed Forces must be recognized as a terrorist organization.

The European Union is currently preparing a sixth package of sanctions. We discussed this today with Charles Michel. We are working to make it truly painful for the Russian military machine and the Russian state as a whole.

I emphasize in all negotiations that sanctions are needed not as an end in themselves, but as a practical tool to motivate Russia to seek peace.

It is important that the EU Delegation and the embassies of friendly countries resumed work in Kyiv. This is one of the signals needed to tell Russia that there is no alternative to peace. There is no alternative to ending the war and guaranteeing full security for Ukraine. The more diplomatic missions return to work in our capital, the stronger this important signal will be.

Already 18 foreign missions are working in Kyiv in various formats. In particular, Italy, Iran, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Poland, the Holy See, Slovenia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Turkey, France, the Czech Republic, Estonia and others.

The return to normal life of the liberated cities and communities of Ukraine continues. 934 settlements have already been liberated. Police resumed work in 435 settlements. Local self-government started working in 431 communities. The work of humanitarian headquarters was launched in 361 settlements. We are gradually restoring people's access to medical and educational services, to social protection bodies. We are restoring road infrastructure, electricity, gas and water supply.

The biggest threats are mines and tripwire mines planted by the occupiers and shells that did not explode. It takes a lot of time, a lot of effort to neutralize them all. And I am grateful to all the specialists, all the rescuers who perform this important task.

Once again, I urge our citizens returning to liberated communities to be very careful. Do not enter the territory that has not yet been inspected. Do not go into the woods yet. If you see anything resembling a mine or a tripwire mine, report it to the police and rescuers immediately. Do not delay or attempt to remove hazardous items yourself.

The situation in the east and south of our country remains as severe as possible. The occupiers do not give up trying to gain at least some victory for themselves through a new large-scale offensive. At least something they can "feed" their propagandists with.

And I am sincerely grateful to each of our defenders, to all the Armed Forces of Ukraine, to all our cities, to all our communities that are resisting the invaders. To those who hold on and with their struggle, without exaggeration, save our state.

Mariupol, Avdiivka, Maryinka, Krasnohorivka, Toretsk, Velyka Novosilka, Zolote, Popasna, Izyum, Kharkiv, Hulyaipole, Mykolaiv, Vysokopillya, Snihurivka and dozens, dozens of other cities, dozens of other communities of the east, communities of the south of Ukraine, in the struggle for which the fate of our people and our freedom is being decided.

We are doing more than the maximum to ensure the supply of weapons to our army. Every day, all our diplomats, all our representatives and I personally work 24/7 through all possible channels - official and unofficial - to speed up the delivery of aid.

And I am very pleased to say, with cautious optimism, that our partners started to understand our needs better. Understand what exactly we need. And when exactly we need all this. Not in weeks, not in a month, but immediately. Right now, as Russia is trying to intensify its attacks.

Traditionally, before delivering the address, I signed a decree awarding our defenders. 203 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards, 49 of them posthumously.

Five of our servicemen were posthumously awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine.

Eternal memory to everyone who gave life for Ukraine!

Eternal gratitude to all who stood up for our state!

Glory to Ukraine!

Ukrainians!

All our defenders!

The 55th day of our defense against Russia's full-scale aggression is coming to an end. At present, virtually the entire combat-ready part of the invaders’ army is concentrated on the territory of our state and in the border areas of Russia. They drove against Ukraine almost everyone and almost everything that can fight us.

Therefore, in this confrontation, in this defense, before the eyes of the whole world, we are really opposing the army, which was considered the second or third in power. And the way our Armed Forces are holding on, the way our entire nation is boldly defending itself shows that the Ukrainian army has long deserved to be higher than the Russian one in global rankings.

If we had access to all the weapons we need, which our partners have and which are comparable to the weapons used by the Russian Federation, we would have already ended this war. We would have already restored peace and liberated our territory from the occupiers. Because the superiority of the Ukrainian military in tactics and wisdom is quite obvious.

That is why I emphasize the simple truth in literally every contact with the leaders of the democratic world, in all negotiations, in all interviews - it is unfair that Ukraine is still forced to ask for what its partners have been storing somewhere for years. If they have the weapons that Ukraine needs here, needs now, if they have the ammunition that we need here and now, it is their moral duty first of all to help protect freedom. Help save the lives of thousands of Ukrainians.

If we had received what we are getting now in the first week of the war, the benefit for Ukraine and for freedom in Europe would be greater, I am sure. And if we get what some partners plan to hand over to Ukraine in the coming weeks right now, it will save the lives of thousands of people.

I hope that the partners will hear this thesis and understand that every day matters. Any delay in helping Ukraine gives the occupiers an opportunity to kill more Ukrainians.

The intensity of fire by Russian troops in the Kharkiv direction, in Donbas and in the Dnipropetrovsk region has increased significantly. They still consider ordinary housing infrastructure normal targets for them. In this war, the Russian army will forever inscribe itself in world history as perhaps the most barbaric and inhuman army in the world.

Purposefully killing civilians, destroying residential neighborhoods, civilian infrastructure, using all kinds of weapons for this, including those prohibited by international conventions, is the signature of the Russian army. And this is vileness, which will mark the Russian state as a source of absolute evil for generations.

And when a special tribunal is set up to convict all those guilty of war crimes, a Russian passport will mean only one thing in any country: unequivocal condemnation from all decent people, unequivocal unwillingness to cooperate.

The situation in Mariupol remains unchanged - as severe as possible. The Russian army is blocking any efforts to organize humanitarian corridors and save our people. The occupiers are trying to carry out deportation or even mobilization of the local residents who have fallen into their hands. The fate of at least tens of thousands of Mariupol residents who were previously relocated to Russian-controlled territory is unknown.

Unfortunately, we do not hear a response from Russia to the exchange offer, which could save the civilians and defenders of Mariupol. And this silence should be noted by all who have been or may be associated with Russia. When your fate is decided, Moscow will be silent. This is illustrative. And this is the best argument not to have contacts with the Russian Federation.

In the south of our country, the occupiers are trying to demonstrate at least something that can be presented in Russia as the alleged readiness of Ukrainians to cooperate with Russian structures. It looks pathetic. After 55 days of war, the occupiers didn't manage to attract anyone to their side except for some outcasts.

The situation is quite clear - Ukrainians in all regions of our state support Ukrainian national unity. They support our national statehood.

And I am grateful to all the residents of the temporarily occupied cities, temporarily occupied communities - Kherson, Kakhovka, Melitopol and all our other communities - for this clear position. No cooperation with the occupiers. No support for the collaborators. The more principled we are, the more principled you will be, the sooner normal life will return.

I held a meeting with representatives of the Verkhovna Rada today. We discussed the plan of parliamentary work, agreed on important draft decisions for the state, which need to be adopted in the near future.

In particular, the deputies were offered to support the technical decision to extend the martial law. This is necessary for the legal support of the defense of our state and the stable operation of all structures.

We also discussed a bill on the procedure for deploying the capacities of the enterprises that were evacuated from the combat zone. A bill with amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code of Ukraine, which are necessary for cooperation with the International Criminal Court. A bill on the legal regime in the temporarily occupied territories.

The conversation was substantive, and I hope that the deputies will work out these bills soon enough.

I spoke today with Prime Minister of the Netherlands Mark Rutte. Informed him about the current situation in the areas of hostilities and especially in Donbas. Expressed gratitude for the strong support for Ukraine. We coordinated the next steps needed to protect our state and freedom in Europe. Agreed to increase the supply of heavy weapons, including armored vehicles.

I also spoke with European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen. In particular, on the defensive, financial and humanitarian needs of Ukraine. We are accelerating procedures so that Ukraine can move forward in European integration as fast as possible. Now, during the war, this movement and its speed are also elements of protection of our state, preservation of freedom for our people.

More and more global companies are announcing the shutdown in Russia. Today, the German company Henkel has joined hundreds of other such large companies.

I want to emphasize that this is inevitable: any normal business will have to make such a decision and leave Russia. Now the Russian state is at a level where any association with it and any support for it means complicity in mass killings. Complicity in what will be called crimes against humanity and genocide.

Before delivering this address, I signed the traditional decree on awarding our defenders. 286 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards. 229 of them are servicemen of the 36th separate brigade of marines, which together with other units heroically defends Mariupol. Maximum gratitude from all the Ukrainian people to the 36th brigade, Azov, the 12th brigade of the National Guard of Ukraine, border guards, Right Sector volunteers, the 555th military hospital, police officers and territorial defense.

Eternal glory to everyone who stood up for Mariupol, our entire state and the people of Ukraine!

Eternal memory to everyone who died for Ukraine!

Glory to Ukraine!

We, the world and history will take from Russia much more than Russian missiles will take from Ukraine

The 54th day of our defense against the Russian invasion is coming to an end. The Russian army is not slowing down the use of missiles against Ukraine. Although it should have realized that it will be extremely difficult for it to restore the missile arsenal given even already imposed sanctions. Without imports, they can't even do that. And when all the loopholes used to circumvent sanctions are closed, and when even tougher sanctions are imposed, restoring Russia's missile capabilities will be unrealistic. That is, Russian missile strikes lead to only one thing - missile self-demilitarization of the Russian Federation.

A similar process is taking place with other Russian weapons. Producing new artillery, aircraft, new helicopters and cruisers under sanctions will be a daunting task for Russia.

None of the missile strikes has changed the situation for Russia tangibly. And if you evaluate them all together, the conclusion will be - this is strategic nonsense.

Today's strikes at Lviv, at the Dnipropetrovsk region and any other Russian strikes mean only one thing: we, the world and history will take from Russia much more than Russian missiles will take from Ukraine. Every lost life is an argument for Ukrainians and other free nations to perceive Russia exclusively as a threat generation after generation. And any infrastructure can be restored. And we will definitely do it.

In the east and south of our country, the occupiers are recently trying to attack in a little more thought-out manner than before. They are putting pressure, looking for a weak spot in the defense of our state to go there with the main forces...

Apparently, Russian generals, accustomed to neglecting any losses, have already killed so many Russian servicemen that even they have to be more careful, as there will be no one left to attack.

However, they should not hope this will help them. It is only a matter of time when the whole territory of our state will be liberated. It can now be stated that Russian troops have begun the battle for Donbas, for which they have been preparing for a long time. A very large part of the entire Russian army is now focused on this offensive.

No matter how many Russian soldiers are driven there, we will fight. We will defend ourselves. We will do it daily. We will not give up anything Ukrainian, and we do not need what’s not ours.

And I am grateful to all our fighters, to all our heroic cities in Donbas, to Mariupol, and also to the cities of the Kharkiv region which are holding on, defending the fate of the whole state, repelling the forces of invaders. Rubizhne, Popasna, Zolote, Lysychansk, Severodonetsk, Kramatorsk and all others that have been with Ukraine all these years and forever.

I spoke with the President of the Republic of Lithuania and friend of our country Gitanas Nausėda. I informed him about the situation in the combat zones and especially about the situation in Mariupol. We are coordinating our actions to increase Russia's liability for the war.

I also spoke with the Prime Ministers of Bulgaria and Croatia. About the threats created by Russia to free navigation in the Black Sea, about our cooperation at the level of the European Union, about the effective support for Ukraine and the development of solutions for the restoration of peace.

I held an important meeting today on the post-war reconstruction and development of Ukraine. We need to work out everything in detail already now to be fully prepared when the war is over.

We are developing a comprehensive plan that provides for the reconstruction of what’s destroyed, the modernization of state structures and the maximum acceleration of Ukraine's development. It is not just about the amount of physical work - to build housing, restore businesses, attract new businesses that will work to rebuild infrastructure and renew economic relations in our country. It is also about rethinking how our country will develop in the future. What industries can be the basis of growth after the war. What solutions and resources are needed to increase the level of processing in Ukraine and stop selling raw materials, as it was before. Which cities will become the locomotives of economic and technological growth, pulling up the surrounding areas.

As of now - if you listen carefully to all the discussions that are taking place in our country at different levels about the post-war reconstruction - the main topic in them is actually about money. What financial package is needed to recover from the war? But I always emphasize that money is not the foundation for the country's development. Ideas, people - that's the foundation. And when there are ideas, when there are our people, you begin to see what money is needed for and in what amount.

We need to have a clear vision of this or that branch of our economy, the direction of development we expect from this or that city, the benefits this or that institution can bring to the state as a whole.

Of course, for small and medium-sized businesses we must provide the most comfortable and free environment. In terms of taxes and administrative relations. Of course, digitization is a top priority. Security is also a top priority for us. Defensive potential must be at a new level. Of course, judicial, anti-corruption and other important reforms need to be brought to fruition.

But all this must work for a concrete vision of what Ukraine will be like. What it will be like a year after the war, 5 years after the war, 10, 20 years after. What exactly will be important for our people. What exactly will be important for global business. How many jobs and in what industries will be available to Ukrainians.

Ukraine's accession to the European Union is an integral part of this strategic vision. And in this context, today was a historic event - we are going through one of the stages before joining the EU. We provided answers to a questionnaire received from Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, and Josep Borrell, Head of European Diplomacy.

Each country that joined the European Union went through the same procedure with the questionnaire. The only difference is that it took them years, and we completed it in a little more than a week. We will provide the second part of the answers shortly. And we hope that Europe’s decision in response will be quick.

The status of a candidate for membership in the European Union will open for us unprecedented opportunities in our history for the restoration and modernization of Ukraine.

We are negotiating with countries at the bilateral level and with international financial institutions to support our country's reconstruction program. Of course, we will involve global business as much as possible. But we are primarily interested in creating jobs and added value in Ukraine. Therefore, localization will continue to be an important process for us.

In the evening I signed a traditional decree on awarding our heroes. 192 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards, 24 of them posthumously.

Eternal memory to all who died for Ukraine!

Eternal glory to each of our defenders!

Glory to Ukraine!

The answer to the attempt of "ruble occupation" of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions must be full coverage of the Russian banking system by sanctions

Today, Christians of the Western rite celebrate Easter. The happiest Christian holiday. A holiday of the victory of life over death.

The Ukrainian Catholic community unites millions of people. And I sincerely wish everyone peace. I wish you to keep the light of soul even in this dark time of war against our state. To keep it to see how good will soon surely defeat evil for the sake of our country, and how the truth will overcome any lies of the occupiers.

A wonderful gift for the holiday was made by our team at the "Invictus Games", in which veterans and servicemen take part. On the first day of the competition, which started in the Netherlands, the Ukrainians won "gold", "silver" and "bronze".

Rodion Sitdikov won the "gold" in the shot put. Artem Lukashuk and Ivan Heretsun brought Ukraine "silver" and "bronze" in long jump. Thank you guys from all of us, from all Ukrainians!

This is always important, and now it is extremely important. To glorify our flag, to perform the Ukrainian national anthem and to honor our heroes.

But whatever the day and whatever the holiday, the task remains the same for everyone in power. Work not even one hundred, but two hundred percent to ensure our defense. Provide Ukraine with weapons, financial support and all other supplies.

I began this day with a meeting with the military and government officials on the situation in combat zones. Russian troops are preparing for an offensive operation in the east of our country. It will begin in the near future. They want to literally finish off and destroy Donbas. Destroy everything that once gave glory to this industrial region. Just as the Russian troops are destroying Mariupol, they want to wipe out other cities and communities in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

We are doing everything to ensure defense. We are in constant contact with partners. We are grateful to those who really help with everything they can. But those who have the weapons and ammunition we need and delay their provision must know that the fate of this battle also depends on them. The fate of people who can be saved.

The 53rd day of the war is over, and we have been waiting for answers to some points in our weapons inquiries for 53 days. And some answers are formulated so that delivery can begin only in May. I speak directly in such cases: every delay in weapons, every political delay is a permission for Russia to take the lives of Ukrainians. This is how Russia interprets it. That should not be the case in reality.

Constant shelling of our city of Kharkiv continues. Today, Russian troops hit, in particular, the streets of Culture, Shevchenko and Darwin. Apparently, these are especially dangerous words for Russia - "culture", "Shevchenko", "Darwin". This is something that threatens its existence. As of this moment, the list of dead from this strike includes five Kharkiv residents and at least 15 wounded.

In the last four days alone, 18 people have been killed and 106 have been wounded by the Russian shelling of Kharkiv. This is nothing but deliberate terror. Mortars, artillery against ordinary residential neighborhoods, against ordinary civilians.

The democratic world must also react to what the occupiers are doing in the south of Ukraine - in the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions. Torture chambers are built there. They abduct representatives of local authorities and anyone deemed visible to local communities. They blackmail teachers. They steal money provided for paying pensions. Humanitarian aid is blocked and stolen. They create starvation.

The occupiers are also trying to tear off the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions, following the example of the so-called DPR and LPR. This territory is being transferred to the ruble zone and subordinated to the administrative machine of Russia.

All this requires greater speed from Western countries in preparing a new powerful package of sanctions. The answer to the attempted "ruble occupation" of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions must be full coverage of the Russian banking and financial systems by sanctions. Because they are part of the occupation machine.

Of course, the need for an embargo on oil supplies from Russia is growing every day. Everyone in Europe and America already sees Russia openly using energy to destabilize Western societies. Russia's bet on chaos in fuel markets should not succeed.

And today I really want to support once again all those who are fighting for Ukraine in the cities and communities of the south of our state. Who protect our national symbols. Who protect our freedom. Every manifestation of such a struggle makes it difficult for the occupiers to carry out their task.

Sabotage the orders of the occupiers. Do not cooperate with them. Protest. It is necessary to hold on so that Russia does not manage to distort life in other cities of Ukraine, like it did in Donetsk and Luhansk.

I spoke today with Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund Kristalina Georgieva. On ensuring the financial stability of Ukraine and on preparations for the reconstruction of our state after the war. We touched upon specific areas of possible cooperation with the IMF both in the near future and in the next few years. I am confident that progress in our relations with the fund will be tangible. And I want to thank Mrs. Kristalina for her personal and significant support.

Prime Minister of Ukraine Denys Shmyhal reported today on the implementation of the order on additional social assistance due to the war.

First. Every displaced person can receive financial assistance for living. Every month it is 2 thousand hryvnias for an adult and 3 thousand hryvnias for a child. It is possible to apply for this in the nearest administrative services center, bodies of social protection, and starting from Wednesday - in "Diia".

Second. People are being evacuated from the war-torn areas. The government is deploying special locations to ensure temporary accommodation for people and provide financial assistance immediately at railway and bus stations.

Third. Applications for destroyed or damaged housing are being collected through "Diia". Be sure to apply if you have lost an apartment, house or if they have been damaged by shelling.

Fourth. I urge employers, no matter how difficult it may be, to try to employ displaced persons. Now every job saved and every extra job is helping protect the state in war.

For each displaced person whom the business hires, the company will receive co-financing of labor costs from the state. This is 6,500 hryvnias. The application can also be submitted on the "Diia" portal.

Traditionally in the evening I signed decrees on awarding our heroes. 188 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards. 553 warriors of the National Guard. 64 border guards. 5 police officers, 26 employees of the State Emergency Service.

6 defenders of Ukraine were awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine.

And finally. Another congratulation - also for our heroes, for Ukrainian firefighters.

Today is the Day of Firefighters. And I sincerely congratulate everyone who protects the security of our people, our land from fire. Who is at war almost every day even in peacetime

The effectiveness of instruments of influence on Russia determines how long this war will last

I am sure that you periodically see in the media - Ukrainian and Western - reports on how long this war can last. Some say a few weeks. Others - several years. Some say the war will last until the end of this year. And someone advises to prepare for a permanent confrontation with Russia as long as it exists.

Of course, I also hear different predictions. I have much more information than some media outlets about the intentions and capabilities of the Russian army. About the potential of the Russian economy. About the emotional state of society in Russia. All this must be taken into account before saying how long the war will last. Therefore, we must take into account the effectiveness of instruments of influence on Russia used by Ukraine and our entire anti-war coalition against Russia's aggression.

The success of our military on the battlefield is really significant. Historically significant. But not enough to clean our land from the occupiers yet. We’ll beat them more.

Sanctions against Russia are very significant. Economically painful. But still not enough for the Russian military machine to be left without means of subsistence. We promote stronger, more destructive ones.

So, in fact, it is these two areas that determine how long this war will last.

I always tell all our partners with whom I discuss this issue that the amount of support for Ukraine directly affects the restoration of peace. It literally defines how many more Ukrainians the occupiers will manage to kill.

If someone says: year or years, I answer: you can make the war much shorter. The more and the sooner we get all the weapons we have requested, the stronger our position will be and the sooner peace will come. The more and the sooner we get the financial support we have requested, the sooner there will be peace. The sooner the democratic world recognizes that the oil embargo against Russia and the complete blockade of its banking sector are necessary steps towards peace, the sooner the war will end.

So the number one task is to speed up the restoration of peace.

Our Armed Forces are doing it brilliantly. They are repelling the occupiers' attacks. They are carrying out counterattacks. They have already tormented - in the true sense of the word - Russian conventional aviation so much that they are forced to use strategic long-range aircraft.

I am grateful to each of our defenders for this great work.

Our diplomats must continue their activity in all possible directions, at all possible levels. Both official and unofficial.

The next package of sanctions against Russia must include an abandonment of Russian oil. In general, the democratic world must admit that money for Russian energy resources is in fact money for the destruction of democracy. When these decisions are made, we will all be able to see that peace is approaching.

I held a meeting with government officials today. The key topic is the solution of urgent economic issues that arose during martial law.

It was noted that four-fifths of all Ukrainian enterprises have already returned to work in a safe area. In particular, this applies to heavy industry enterprises. Transport networks are being rebuilt. Good performance is shown in trade and services. And all this is also the fulfillment of the national task of accelerating the restoration of peace.

That is why I am grateful to everyone who keeps jobs, who employs our people, who helps businesses adapt to these difficult conditions and gives Ukraine the necessary economic strength to live.

No matter what, in all cities and communities where there are no occupiers and hostilities, it is necessary to restore the economy to the maximum.

Energy issues and the end of this heating season were discussed. The season was successful in spite of everything. Despite all the predictions, tariffs have not increased. There were no rolling blackouts. Supplies were not disrupted even in wartime. Preparations have also begun for the next heating season. We discussed the purchase of gas, the purchase of coal.

We offer at least for the next 6 months the electricity tariff in the amount of 1 hryvnia 44 kopecks per kilowatt for those who use less than 250 kilowatts. This is 80% of our people.

The Minister of Agrarian Policy and Food reported that the sowing campaign has begun and continues in all regions of our country, including Luhansk and Donetsk.

We also talked to government officials today about filling in the questionnaire that Ukraine received from President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen. This is a necessary stage in the preparation of our country to become a candidate for EU membership. The work is almost complete, and we will soon provide the answers to the representatives of the European Union.

I held an important meeting today with all the leaders of the state power bloc. Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Chief of the General Staff, Head of the Main Intelligence Directorate, Commander of the National Guard, Minister of Internal Affairs, Head of the Security Service of Ukraine. The meeting was also attended by the Head of the President's Office, the Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council and the head of our delegation at the negotiations. The main topic is Mariupol. Details cannot be made public at the moment. But we are doing everything to save our people.

The restoration of normal life in those areas and districts where the occupiers were expelled continues. The amount of work is really huge. 918 settlements of different scales, but equally important for us, for Ukraine, have already been de-occupied.

We carry out demining. We restore the supply of electricity, water and gas. We restore the work of the police, post office, state and local authorities.

Humanitarian headquarters have started working on the territory of 338 liberated settlements. We are resuming the provision of regular and emergency medical care, the work of educational institutions - where it is really possible. In total, on this day, Russian troops have destroyed or damaged 1,018 educational institutions across our country.

Restoration of roads and railways has begun. In particular, from tomorrow the railway connection with Chernihiv and Nizhyn will be restored. Trains are already running between the cities of the Sumy region.

The teams of Ukravtodor and Ukrzaliznytsia work quite efficiently, and I am grateful to them for this speed. For giving people back a sense of normal life, which the occupiers tried to destroy forever.

In the south and east of our country, the situation is still very difficult, far from talking about recovery.

In the occupied districts of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions, the Russian military continue to terrorize civilian residents of our country. They are looking for anyone who has ever been associated with the Ukrainian army or government agencies.

The occupiers think that this will somehow make it easier for them to control the territory. But they are wrong. They deceive themselves. The problem of the occupiers is not that they are not accepted by some activists, veterans or journalists. Russia's problem is that the entire Ukrainian people does not accept it and will never accept it again. Russia lost Ukraine forever. Actually, it lost the whole world. It will not be accepted anywhere anymore.

And the cruelty with which Russian troops are trying to conquer the Azov, Donbas, Kharkiv regions, only takes away even the slightest chance of these territories and these people to have any ties with this state at least sometime in the future.

Maybe somewhere in Russia cruelty is respected. But in Ukraine cruelty is despised. And punished. And it is obligatory.

Today I signed decrees on awarding our military. 237 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards, 34 of them posthumously.

The title of Hero of Ukraine was awarded to Colonel Kashchenko Dmytro Valeriyovych, commander of the 58th separate motorized infantry brigade of the Operational Command "North" of the Land Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. For the personal example of heroism that inspires comrades in service, for extremely effective combat operations and concrete and very important results for maintaining the positions of our army and expelling the occupiers.

And finally. The important words that hope always wins even under seemingly insurmountable circumstances.

This Saturday, the Jewish community celebrates Passover. Holiday of liberation. Holiday of life. I sincerely wish all those who celebrate in Ukraine and in the world peace, good and the inevitable defeat of any evil that threatens freedom and life on earth.

Unbreakable people of the bravest country!

We have withstood 50 days already. 50 days of Russian invasion, although the occupiers gave us a maximum of five. That's how they "know us". That's how they "make friends with reality."

Russia did not start the war against Ukraine on February 24. Russian troops came to us in 2014. They captured our Crimea. They turned it into a large military base. They made the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov one of the most dangerous seas on the planet. They started a terrible, absolutely cynical war in our Donbas. They have been killing our people for 8 years. 14 thousand were killed during this time!

How did the world respond to this? The question remained rhetorical. But that is why they decided they could afford a full-scale war.

Some are still debating the severity of sanctions against the Russian Federation. But what is there to discuss when Russian troops are already repeating on our land what Europe saw only during World War II?

During the 50 days of full-scale invasion of the Russian Federation, they showed that Donbas is the main target for Russia. It is Donbas that Russia wants to destroy in the first place. It is the Luhansk and Donetsk regions that Russian troops are destroying as if they want only stones to be left. And no people to be left at all.

They forcibly recruit residents of these areas into their army. They throw them into the worst battles, literally in the frontal of our defense. They are destroying the cities and villages of Donbas. They burn everything that endured eight years of that war.

For 80 years, proud and tidy Kharkiv has not seen such torments that Russia has brought to it. Why do they destroy it? What can be achieved by burning Kharkiv?

What exactly can destruction on Saltivka or on Freedom Square give to Russia?

And these are no longer rhetorical questions. This is a question of how absurd this invasion of the Russian Federation is. How suicidal it is for everything that Russia allegedly "protects". For Russian culture, for relations with this nation, even for the Russian language. Russia is burning all this with its weapons. For decades at least. For generations.

Ancient Chernihiv. Which is over a thousand years old. Which saw so many wars and so many invaders that at least in the XXI century it deserved peace and tranquility. But... Russia came. Came with the worst that Chernihiv has experienced since the X century. Since the period of Rus’ relation to which Russia once claimed. Now this myth is also burned. Rus’ would not destroy itself. Strangers did that to it. Horde and other invaders. That's who came to our land today. And they are fighting in the same way - for the sake of looting and for the sake of torture.

Thank God, the Armed Forces of Ukraine and our people, we defended most of our country.

I remember the first day of the invasion of the Russian Federation. I remember what I was told on February 24. In particular, the strong of this world. To put it mildly, no one was sure that we would withstand it. Everyone sympathized. Many of them advised me to flee the country. Advised to actually surrender to tyranny.

But they didn't know us either. And they did not know how brave Ukrainians are, how much we value freedom. Our opportunity to live the way we want. Not the people who rule in such a way that their army sees toilets for the first time in their lives in the occupied territories and steals even ordinary household appliances.

The occupiers will be responsible for everything they have done in Ukraine. For everything they did to Ukrainians. They will be responsible for Bucha, Kramatorsk, Volnovakha, Okhtyrka. For Hostomel and Borodyanka. For Izyum, for Mariupol and all other cities and communities of Ukraine, which the Russian army pulled back to the period 80 years ago. To that terrible time, about which everyone in the world has always said: "Never again." Here it is again. Here it is now. And we will do everything to make it truly the last.

Because the question "How to guarantee security for Ukraine and for Europe?" will never be rhetorical again. We will not allow this.

I am grateful to everyone who supported our state. Who immediately asked how they could help. Who stood with us back to back and helped us get what is necessary for the defense of our state.

This period, these 50 days have shown me many world leaders in a different way. Different states. I have seen great generosity in those who are not rich themselves. I have seen the extraordinary determination of those who were not taken seriously by global leaders. I have seen that the democratic world does have those whose will is enough to protect freedom from the onslaught of tyranny.

I have seen politicians behaving as if they had no power. And I have seen non-politicians who did more in these 50 days than some statesmen who claimed leadership.

But all that is just an add-on. An add-on for how Ukraine is defended by our people, all our people. Those who stopped the advance of endless columns of Russian equipment. Those who rebuff constant attacks in Donbas. Those who heroically defend Mariupol, helping our entire state to withstand. Those who stopped the offensive from the south. And made our Chornobaivka famous. Those who drove the enemy out of the north.

Those who have shown that Russian aviation is defenseless, even though Russia has spent tens of billions of dollars on various systems to protect its aircraft.

Those who have shown that Russian ships can go... to the bottom only.

Those who help the army and society find everything they may need.

Those who save, heal, those who teach. Conduct mine clearance. Who provide us all with a stable connection.

Those who rebuilt supply chains for the whole country.

Those who maintain financial stability, who saved the business and continued to work.

Those who help the displaced persons.

Those who started the sowing campaign. Those who give Ukraine the correct information and the necessary emotions. All our journalists, all those who united for the national telethon.

50 days of our defense is an achievement. Achievement of millions of Ukrainians. Everyone who made the main decision in life on February 24 - to fight. To be human. Not to give up. And not to betray.

From time immemorial to the present day, mankind has been looking for heroes. People always appreciate heroes. They always support those who are brave. And always feel who is fighting for the good. During the 50 days of this war, Ukraine became a hero for the whole free world. For those who have the courage to call a spade a spade. For those who are not poisoned by propaganda. You have all become heroes. All Ukrainian men and women who withstood and do not give up. And who will win. Who will return peace to Ukraine. I'm sure of it.

I spoke today with our team, which will take part in the Invictus Games international sports competition. Among them are both veterans and servicemen who are currently defending our state. They are deeply concerned that they had to go to the competition. I assured them that we will wait for their return and will support them in the competition just as sincerely. I believe that our team will make us proud of it this year as well.

And traditionally, as every evening, I signed decrees on awarding those who excelled in the defense of the state. 221 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, 34 of them posthumously. And two employees of the State Special Communications Service of Ukraine.

The title of Hero of Ukraine was awarded to Major Kukurba Oleksandr Vasyliovych, chief of intelligence of the 299th tactical aviation brigade of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. Thanks to his courageous actions, dozens of enemy equipment units and hundreds of occupiers were destroyed.

I also awarded those whose surnames cannot be told. But I awarded them for what is definitely good for everyone.

Either Russia will really seek peace, or it will leave the international arena forever as a result of this war

Indomitable people of the bravest country!

Today was a useful day for our state, for our defense against the Russian offensive. The presidents of four states - friends of Ukraine - arrived in Kyiv. Those who help us from the first days. Who did not hesitate to give us weapons. Who did not doubt whether to impose sanctions. And who is now at the level of the European Union pushing for a tougher sanctions package against the Russian Federation. Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia. I was very glad to meet with the presidents today. The negotiations were fruitful.

It is important that the presidents visited Borodyanka in the Kyiv region, where they saw with their own eyes what the occupiers had done. For the presidents, this is another argument to push harder for tangible sanctions against Russia.

First of all, we need an oil embargo. And Europe's clear readiness to give up all Russian energy. The European Union must stop sponsoring Russia's military machine.

Western sanctions policy was also discussed today by a group of international experts led by Michael McFaul and Andriy Yermak. The group has been working for three weeks. It consists of international and Ukrainian experts who assess the sanctions imposed and how Russia is trying to circumvent them.

The group has prepared concrete proposals on how to remove sanctions loopholes, which are constantly used by Russia, and how to immediately enhance sanctions to make it tangible for Moscow.

I spoke today with US President Biden. The topics of the conversation included the prosecution of all Russian servicemen and commanders who committed war crimes. International cooperation for this. A new package of defensive support for Ukraine was discussed. The agreement was reached. $ 800 million. Weapons, ammunition, other assistance. Artillery systems, armored personnel carriers, helicopters. Sincere gratitude for your support! We also agreed to enhance sanctions against Russia.

I addressed the Parliament and the people of Estonia. Expressed gratitude for the help provided to Ukraine, including weapons. I also called on Estonia to join the project of Ukraine's reconstruction after the war.

We are already cooperating with Estonia in the field of digitization. And after the war it could become an even bigger project. On restoration of government and business digital systems, on cybersecurity. On restoration of the relevant educational institutions.

Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court Karim Khan visited Bucha. It is right that a group of forensic experts from the International Criminal Court will start working in the city. Responsibility for the Russian military for war crimes is inevitable. We will drag them all to the tribunal. And not only for what was done in Bucha.

In general, in the north of our country, in the liberated areas, mine clearance continues. The occupiers left tens of thousands of unexploded shells, mines and tripwire mines - a lot of everything. Therefore, everyone who wants to return home to the liberated territory should be as careful as possible, as attentive as possible. And immediately inform the police and rescuers in case you find a strange object, an explosive object.

Combat reports for today do not differ significantly from previous ones. Russian troops are stepping up activity in the eastern and southern directions. They are trying to retaliate for their defeats. Rocket bombings and artillery strikes continue. New columns of equipment are being brought in. They are looking for reserves. They are trying to recruit residents of the south of our country - that is, from these temporarily occupied areas in addition to the so-called mobilization in certain districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

All this feverish activity of the occupiers testifies first of all to their insecurity. To the fact that even with significant stocks of Soviet military equipment and a significant number of soldiers, whom the commanders do not spare at all, the Russian troops doubt their ability to break us, to break Ukraine. Well, we do everything to justify their doubts.

And I am grateful to all our defenders who hold positions and teach Russian soldiers to think that this war against Ukraine can only end in Russia's strategic defeat - sooner or later.

Either the Russian leadership will really seek peace, or as a result of this war, Russia will leave the international arena forever.

And before delivering this address, as always, I signed decrees to award our defenders. 270 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards, 7 of them posthumously. 11 employees of the State Protection Department were also awarded.

Another decree awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine to 2 servicemen of our Armed Forces. Posthumously.

Either Russia will really seek peace, or it will leave the international arena for

Indomitable people of the bravest country!

Today was a useful day for our state, for our defense against the Russian offensive. The presidents of four states - friends of Ukraine - arrived in Kyiv. Those who help us from the first days. Who did not hesitate to give us weapons. Who did not doubt whether to impose sanctions. And who is now at the level of the European Union pushing for a tougher sanctions package against the Russian Federation. Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia. I was very glad to meet with the presidents today. The negotiations were fruitful.

It is important that the presidents visited Borodyanka in the Kyiv region, where they saw with their own eyes what the occupiers had done. For the presidents, this is another argument to push harder for tangible sanctions against Russia.

First of all, we need an oil embargo. And Europe's clear readiness to give up all Russian energy. The European Union must stop sponsoring Russia's military machine.

Western sanctions policy was also discussed today by a group of international experts led by Michael McFaul and Andriy Yermak. The group has been working for three weeks. It consists of international and Ukrainian experts who assess the sanctions imposed and how Russia is trying to circumvent them.

The group has prepared concrete proposals on how to remove sanctions loopholes, which are constantly used by Russia, and how to immediately enhance sanctions to make it tangible for Moscow.

I spoke today with US President Biden. The topics of the conversation included the prosecution of all Russian servicemen and commanders who committed war crimes. International cooperation for this. A new package of defensive support for Ukraine was discussed. The agreement was reached. $ 800 million. Weapons, ammunition, other assistance. Artillery systems, armored personnel carriers, helicopters. Sincere gratitude for your support! We also agreed to enhance sanctions against Russia.

I addressed the Parliament and the people of Estonia. Expressed gratitude for the help provided to Ukraine, including weapons. I also called on Estonia to join the project of Ukraine's reconstruction after the war.

We are already cooperating with Estonia in the field of digitization. And after the war it could become an even bigger project. On restoration of government and business digital systems, on cybersecurity. On restoration of the relevant educational institutions.

Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court Karim Khan visited Bucha. It is right that a group of forensic experts from the International Criminal Court will start working in the city. Responsibility for the Russian military for war crimes is inevitable. We will drag them all to the tribunal. And not only for what was done in Bucha.

In general, in the north of our country, in the liberated areas, mine clearance continues. The occupiers left tens of thousands of unexploded shells, mines and tripwire mines - a lot of everything. Therefore, everyone who wants to return home to the liberated territory should be as careful as possible, as attentive as possible. And immediately inform the police and rescuers in case you find a strange object, an explosive object.

Combat reports for today do not differ significantly from previous ones. Russian troops are stepping up activity in the eastern and southern directions. They are trying to retaliate for their defeats. Rocket bombings and artillery strikes continue. New columns of equipment are being brought in. They are looking for reserves. They are trying to recruit residents of the south of our country - that is, from these temporarily occupied areas in addition to the so-called mobilization in certain districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

All this feverish activity of the occupiers testifies first of all to their insecurity. To the fact that even with significant stocks of Soviet military equipment and a significant number of soldiers, whom the commanders do not spare at all, the Russian troops doubt their ability to break us, to break Ukraine. Well, we do everything to justify their doubts.

And I am grateful to all our defenders who hold positions and teach Russian soldiers to think that this war against Ukraine can only end in Russia's strategic defeat - sooner or later.

Either the Russian leadership will really seek peace, or as a result of this war, Russia will leave the international arena forever.

And before delivering this address, as always, I signed decrees to award our defenders. 270 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded state awards, 7 of them posthumously. 11 employees of the State Protection Department were also awarded.

Another decree awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine to 2 servicemen of our Armed Forces. Posthumously.

The people of Estonia!

Thank you for the opportunity to address you today. In circumstances that take us all back to the darkest times of the 20th century.

For thirty years, the nations of Europe have enjoyed peace, freedom and shared opportunities for development.

Now, Russian revanchism has destroyed all the good that has worked for decades for peace in Europe, for the stability of life of European nations.

Only fragments of the global security architecture are left. The same ruins as from Ukrainian cities bombed by Russian missiles and aircraft.

All the international institutions that are supposed to support peace - the UN, the OSCE and others - are not able to stop Russia's aggression right now. Although this is what they were created for.

Regional alliances, and above all NATO, have faced a difficult reality when no one can be 100% sure whether they will really protect their members in the event of a large-scale Russian attack. The same as the attack on Ukraine.

Or in the event of an even worse attack - with the use of weapons of mass destruction. For the first time in many years, the threat of Russia's use of chemical or even nuclear weapons has to be taken seriously.

Russian state propagandists, clearly guided by the relevant "theme lists", openly discuss Russia's ability to seize all neighboring European countries. They talk about it not just for the sake of emotions, but systematically accustom the Russian audience to the fact that war against neighbors is supposed to be the norm.

Russia's attempt to seize all of Ukraine after 8 years of war in Donbas has brought back to European reality what your people had to go through.

Mass deportations, filtration camps, a consistent attempt to destroy all those who support the national idea. Today, more than 500,000 Ukrainians have been forcibly displaced. Just imagine how much it is!

This is as if the occupiers set, sorry for the example, the goal of deporting all people from Tallinn. The whole city - it was and now there is no one. A third of all your citizens.

Deported Ukrainians are deprived of documents. Their phones are being confiscated. They are trying to take these people to remote regions of the Russian Federation. Attempts to return to Ukraine are being hindered in every possible way. Children are separated from their parents and there are attempts of their illegal adoption in Russian families...

Tens of thousands of people have already been killed in Ukrainian cities affected by Russian strikes. The Russian army uses all kinds of artillery, all kinds of missiles and air bombs against residential areas and civilian infrastructure. In particular, phosphorus bombs and other munitions prohibited by international law.

This is an obvious terror against the civilian population. It is an attempt to break the morale of the people, to subdue Ukrainians for generations or simply to destroy them.

Why does the Russian leadership allow themselves all this? What ensures a sense of impunity for Moscow? I'm sure you know the answer to these questions. It is obvious.

On the one hand, Russia enjoys its privileges in international structures. In particular, the seat occupied by it as a permanent member of the UN Security Council to block any attempts to actually return peace to Europe or other regions where Russia wages a war. Exactly Russia.

On the other hand, the Russian leadership absolutely does not believe that Europe can bring Russia to justice.

Moscow simply does not believe that Europe can force Russia into peace. They expect a split among Europeans and that the priority of maintaining trade for Europeans will be higher than the priority of security or even the priority of survival of Russia's neighboring nations.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

The people of Estonia!

This is the time when we can either stop Russia or lose the whole of Eastern Europe for a very long time. Lose any hope for a safe and free life on the continent governed by universally recognized law not by force.

And I thank you for understanding that.

A crowded rally on February 26 with the participation of tens of thousands of Estonians in the heart of ancient Tallinn on Vabaduse Square in support of Ukraine and in support of freedom in Europe has already become a glorious page of our common history.

Estonia was one of the first to provide Ukraine with the necessary assistance, this is true, including defensive aid.

I am grateful to you for the sincere support of our migrants.

You have been and remain exemplary in your consideration of the issues of Russia's war against Ukraine and the relevant sanctions policy in European and other international structures.

I am grateful to you for abandoning Russian energy. The source of dollars and euros paid to Russia for oil and gas, which makes it self-confident and unwilling to seek equal relations with other nations.

But we all need to do much more to stop Europe's immersion in the evil that the continent saw in the 1940s! In the same occupation that your country, by the way, went through as well.

The black pages of history should not be repeated when deported Ukrainians and Estonians remained for many years in Siberia or the Russian Far East. There are already more than enough Ukrainian and Estonian graves - graves of those who died from communist deportations.

That is why I urge you at the level of the European Union to find such instruments of influence on Russia, such instruments of pressure that could stop deportations and return all deported people home.

The European Union has the power to ensure this. The European Union must use this power.

Until Russia returns forcibly deported Ukrainians, until it returns thousands of abducted children, it must not receive any money from European states or companies.

The European Union has no right to sponsor deportations. The European Union has no right to sponsor war.

The policy of sanctions against the Russian Federation needs to be taken even more seriously. Why are sanctions necessary? Because this is the only tool to force Russia into peace.

I urge you to defend the need for a complete blockade of Russian banks when approving a new, very important package of sanctions against the Russian Federation at the EU level. All banks, not just part of them. I urge you to finally add oil to the sanctions package. An embargo is needed at the level of the entire European Union!

I also invite your state and your specialists to join the work of the joint group set up to investigate the war crimes of the Russian army on the territory of independent Ukraine. Technical and expert support is indispensable now as the number of war crimes already reaches tens of thousands.

These are executions of civilians, torture, rape, blowing up hospitals, bombing maternity hospitals, burning food warehouses, artillery shelling of shelters in which children are hiding, and they knew about it - I emphasize that once again...

There is no crime that Russian soldiers have not committed in the 49 days of this invasion.

We will definitely investigate all these war crimes, identify all the culprits and find them. No matter how long it will take. But if we do it together with you, together with other European countries, we will be able to do it much faster.

Keep in mind that most of Stalin's torturers didn’t bear responsibility for everything they did. Therefore, it is especially important to bring to justice a new generation of Russian executioners.

And this must be done now - for what they have done in Ukraine. So that they do not have to be searched for war crimes against the Baltic nations, against Finland, Poland or any other country.

All those who have already gained freedom in the 20th century must preserve it in the 21st century.

Ukraine will always be grateful to Estonia for the principled support of our state in European integration. I am grateful to you for realizing that Ukraine's accession to the European Union is not just a question of economics or some abstract policy. It is a question of security and guarantees for the preservation of freedom and democracy in Central and Eastern Europe.

Ukraine must receive the status of a candidate for EU membership in the near future.

We must think about the post-war reconstruction of our country already now. When Russia loses, and this will inevitably happen, it will be necessary to prove to Russia and all other potential revanchists in the world that the war will not lead to the realization of their plans.

We are already cooperating with your country in the field of digitization, we are already demonstrating to other European countries the advantages of modern digital systems, including in public administration. After the war, it will become even more relevant, I'm sure.

For restoring the normal functioning of state institutions and local authorities. For the return of companies. For the cyber defense of Ukraine and the whole, I repeat - the whole of Europe.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

The people of Estonia!

The Presidents of the three Baltic states and the President of Poland will arrive in Kyiv in a few hours. I look forward to meeting them, to meeting your President, Mr. Alar Karis.

Such visits to the capital of our state are especially important now. They are important not only for us, not only as evidence of European support for our struggle for freedom.

But also as evidence that all European defenders of freedom will continue to be united. Without any political or economic "bows" to Russia.

Europeans must make every effort to restore international law immediately. To immediately force Russia to seek peace.

This task can only be done jointly by everyone in Europe. At the level of the whole European Union. Together with other members of our anti-war coalition.

If Europe wastes time, Russia will use it to expand the war zone to other countries. I believe that together we will never allow this.

The future of Ukraine directly depends on the strength of our resistance in all its forms

The new package of sanctions should be such that Russia does not even talk about weapons of mass destruction

The 47th day of the Russian-Ukrainian war, this shameful invasion that is gradually wiping Russia out of international relations, is coming to an end. Invasion that makes it more and more toxic every day. Now it is only a matter of time before the Russian army with its own actions and war crimes forces everyone in the world to renounce all ties with the Russian Federation.

Security work is underway in the northern regions of our country, from where the occupiers were expelled. First of all, it is mine clearance. Russian troops left behind tens if not hundreds of thousands of dangerous objects. These are shells that did not explode, mines, tripwire mines. At least several thousand such items are disposed of daily.

The occupiers left mines everywhere. In the houses they seized. Just on the streets, in the fields. They mined people's property, mined cars, doors. They consciously did everything to make the return to these areas after deoccupation as dangerous as possible. Due to the actions of the Russian army, our territory is currently one of the most contaminated by mines in the world. And I believe this should also be considered as a war crime of Russian troops. They deliberately did everything to kill or maim as many of our people as possible, even when they were forced to withdraw from our land. Without the appropriate orders, they would not have done it.

This afternoon I met on Bankova Street with an expert group working on the creation of a special mechanism for pre-trial investigation and judicial review of all war crimes committed by the occupiers. We are working on a legal way to bring the occupiers to justice, which will be as effective and as fast as possible. In order not to wait for decades until all international legal procedures are completed, but to accelerate the onset of justice. I expect that the options for creating such a special mechanism will be presented in the near future.

Today, the occupiers issued a new statement, which testifies to their preparation for a new stage of terror against Ukraine and our defenders. One of the mouthpieces of the occupiers stated that they could use chemical weapons against the defenders of Mariupol. We take this as seriously as possible.

I want to remind the world leaders that the possible use of chemical weapons by the Russian military has already been discussed. And already at that time it meant that it was necessary to react to the Russian aggression much tougher and faster.

The European Union has now begun discussing a sixth package of sanctions against Russia.

It is time to make this package such that even a word about weapons of mass destruction is no longer heard from the Russian side. An oil embargo against Russia is mandatory.

Any new package of sanctions against Russia that does not affect oil will be received in Moscow with a smile.

I spoke about the need to strengthen sanctions against Russia in my address to the parliament and people of the Republic of Korea.

This week I will continue this format of communication with partner countries. Tomorrow I will address the parliament and the people of the Republic of Lithuania.

By the way, Prime Minister of Lithuania Ingrida Šimonytė paid a visit to Ukraine today. I am grateful to her for the support, as well as to all the Lithuanian people.

The issue of punishing all those guilty of crimes against Ukrainians was also discussed today with Prime Minister of the Netherlands Mark Rutte. The second important topic of our conversation was the strengthening of sanctions against Russia. We will continue to coordinate our steps to force the Russian Federation to seek peace.

I also discussed cooperation in the energy sphere with the Prime Minister of Norway. Expressed gratitude for the support of efforts aimed to force Russia to seek peace.

I also held talks with the Chairperson of the African Union, President of Senegal. Informed him about the current situation in Ukraine, about the global threats posed by the Russian invasion.

The key task both today and every day at this time is concrete defensive measures. A concrete increase in our ability to repel any attacks by Russian troops. I am dealing with this issue almost around the clock. I'm sure people see it, too. Just as they see that the military and technical capabilities of the enemy are still very high. Yes, Ukrainians are incomparably braver. Our Armed Forces are beating the occupiers with wisdom and well-thought-out tactics inaccessible to the Russian military.

But when it comes to the necessary weapons, we still depend on the supply, on our partners.

Unfortunately, we are not getting as much as we need to end this war sooner. To completely destroy the enemy on our land. And to fulfill those tasks that are obvious to each of our people. In particular, to unblock Mariupol.

If we got jets and enough heavy armored vehicles, the necessary artillery, we would be able to do it. But...

We still have to agree on this. We still have to persuade. We still have to squeeze out the necessary decisions. I am sure that we will get almost everything we need. But not only time is being lost. The lives of Ukrainians are being lost. Lives that can no longer be returned.

And this is also the responsibility of those who still keep the weapons Ukraine needs in their armory. The responsibility that will forever remain in history.

Just as our gratitude will remain in history. Gratitude to those states and politicians who really helped. Who did not waste time. Who didn’t bargain when life depended on help.

I also signed several important decrees. 187 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, 15 servicemen of the National Guard of Ukraine and 6 servicemen of the Main Intelligence Directorate were awarded. The title of Hero of Ukraine was awarded to 5 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, in particular to 2 colonels of the medical service:

Ivchuk Viktor Mykhailovych - thanks to his actions more than a hundred lives were saved in Mariupol. Both of the military and civilians.

Slesarenko Oleksandr Petrovych - thanks to his actions in the city of Chernihiv, medical care was provided to more than 450 servicemen and more than 600 civilians.

I am grateful to all our heroes!

Korean people!

I am grateful for this opportunity to address you on behalf of the whole of Ukraine, which has been opposing the full-scale invasion of the Russian Federation for 47 days already.

Russia attacked us. Attacked, taking advantage of its military force. This state has spent decades preparing for this war. Decades and enormous resources. Financial resources - hundreds of billions of dollars received for the export of oil and gas and used for the production and accumulation of weapons. As well as human resources.

Already about 2,000 missiles have been fired at our cities by Russia. Artillery shells are simply impossible to count.

But the worst thing is how Russia uses people to prepare and wage war. For the people of Russia such conditions are deliberately created when they are forced to live in total, utter poverty. When they can't afford even the simplest things - normal food, ordinary household appliances, normal education. When they do not have even basic human rights guarantees throughout their lives. And when service in the army for many of them becomes the only, so to speak, social mobility option. Opportunity to get at least something in life. At least somehow try to fend for oneself.

When they got to the war and entered the territory of a neighboring state, tens of thousands of Russian servicemen were simply shocked by the normality of life. They were shocked by cities and villages where people were not in need. Shocked by home appliances in houses. Shocked that people had normal food. A significant number of occupiers simply have never seen such a thing in their lives.

Almost immediately, Russian troops started looting in the territory of Ukraine - in those areas that they managed to invade. They tried to take home to Russia everything of any value. From washing machines to computers. From auto parts to clothes. They just stuffed armored personnel carriers, trucks, stole cars and tried to take out the loot.

You know, there were cases when Russian soldiers took protective plates from their bulletproof vests to hide stolen laptops and tablets in bulletproof vests. It is impossible to believe - when a person is so poor from birth that he thinks that a laptop is more valuable than his own life in the war. But this is exactly what we saw on our land when the Russian army invaded.

It is a collision of two different worlds. The world of ordinary people who just lived a peaceful life, just wanted harmony for themselves and their children, thought about the future. And the world of people who have been specially humiliated by their state for decades, specially driven into poverty and lawlessness, so that their government can send them to any venture. To any war against neighbors.

And this is Russia's war not just to conquer Ukraine. This is only the first step. First, Russia wants to destroy our independence, our state, to tear it apart. Wants to destroy everything that makes us Ukrainians, makes us a separate nation. And then it wants to go further to Europe. Further to Asia.

In the occupied Ukrainian territory, the Russian military purposefully searched for teachers, any people related to the army and the functioning of the state, activists, journalists. All those who educated and defended the national idea. Such people were abducted. Such people were killed. Deliberately. It was an order, it was a tactic.

But Russia has only just begun with Ukraine. The next step in their plan is to destroy other states. Attempt to conquer other neighboring nations. Russia wants to dominate. And it believes that it can do this in only one way: sending its army brought up in total lawlessness to destroy everything that allows other nations to live.

With missile and air strikes at our territory, Russia has already destroyed hundreds of infrastructure facilities that ensured normal economic and social life in Ukraine. Russian missiles and aircraft are destroying oil depots, destroying food warehouses, airports, railway stations, manufacturing plants and universities. 938 educational facilities alone have been destroyed. Almost 300 hospitals. This is a deliberate tactic of the Russian troops, not something accidental.

They are deliberately destroying residential neighborhoods and entire cities. Using artillery, mortars, tanks. Not one city, not two, not three. These are dozens of cities that the Russian military simply tried to wipe off the face of the earth. Black ruins instead of high-rises. Piles of stone and concrete debris instead of ordinary peaceful cities.

We still cannot determine the number of deceased. From the north to the south of the country - in all areas where Russian shells reached, bombs reached - the dismantling of debris is still ongoing.

Active hostilities are still going on in part of our territory. Russia is preparing another offensive. Hoping to break our national resistance after all. The occupiers concentrated tens of thousands of soldiers and a huge amount of equipment to try to strike again.

The worst situation is in Mariupol, in our southern port city, which has been blocked by Russian troops since March 1. It was a city of half a million. Half a million people. The occupiers blocked it and did not even allow food and water to be brought there. They tried to capture it in the most brutal way - just to destroy everything in the city.

Mariupol is destroyed. There are tens of thousands of dead. But even despite this, the Russians do not stop the offensive. They want to make Mariupol a demonstratively destroyed city.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Korean people!

This could be seen in the 20th century. And you remember that. You know what it's like to defend your land. You remember when in the 1950s you were attacked by those who wanted to destroy your freedom.

They destroyed, they killed. What would they have left from your identity if they had succeeded? This is a horrible question. But you withstood, the world helped you. Now we want the same.

There is no hope that Russia will simply stop on its own. There is no hope that reason will prevail, and the Russian leadership will simply refuse to continue this war. Russia can only be forced to do so. It can only be forced to seek peace. Forced to stop tormenting people. Forced to respect the independent life of neighboring nations. Forced to leave the territory of Ukraine.

Our anti-war coalition, formed after the beginning of this brutal invasion of Russia, has already imposed unprecedented sanctions against it. But these sanctions are not enough. Russia does not yet feel that it must stop. This means that much more needs to be done. And not only at the state level.

Russian banks' ties with the global financial system must be severed. It is necessary to limit Russia's exports of energy resources, especially oil. But it is also necessary that world companies stop being sponsors of this barbaric state, which believes that it has the right to destroy the lives of nations. Which believes that it has the right to sow poverty, lawlessness and death around the world.

The more companies stop trading with Russia, work in Russia, pay taxes to the Russian state, the faster reason will win. Russia will have to give up militancy and seek compromises with the world. Because it has already come to the point that Russia is openly blackmailing the world with nuclear and chemical weapons!

But working strategically, we need to protect people here and now. Protect those directly threatened by the Russian army.

For 47 days we have been defending ourselves against virtually the entire Russian army - its most capable units. Our Armed Forces of Ukraine are fighting heroically, very wisely, rationally using available resources and weapons. We receive help from around the world. And I am sincerely grateful to your state, sincerely grateful to your people for their support.

But we need much more. To survive in this war against such a prepared adversary as the Russian Federation. Against a state that does not count the dead and has countless stock of military equipment since the days of the Soviet Union…

We need air defense systems, aircraft, tanks and other armored vehicles, artillery systems and ammunition. And you have something that can be indispensable for us. You have it. Armored vehicles, anti-aircraft, anti-tank, anti-ship weapons. When it comes to survival in a war aimed at the complete conquest of the people, it is necessary to give principled answers. The usual rules for the supply of weapons must be reviewed and action must be taken quickly. It is necessary to help.

Providing the necessary weapons to Ukraine means not only saving the lives of our people, not only giving us the opportunity to unblock our cities, in particular our long-suffering Mariupol, but also saving other states and other regions from further deployment of Russian aggression.

Every nation has the right to live independently. Every city has the right to complete security. Every person has the right to freedom and to seek personal happiness. People should not be instruments of some regimes, some dictators. People have the right to just live. That's what we're fighting for. That’s what we ask you to defend with us. And that is what we will rebuild - I hope together with you and the whole world - after this war.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Korean people!

Today in this address I mentioned our Mariupol four times. Our city, which is experiencing the darkest time in its history. Our city, which Russian troops are simply destroying.

I would like you to watch one video now. Footage taken by a journalist who endured weeks of Russian blockade in Mariupol. I ask you to see with your own eyes what Ukrainians have been seeing for 47 days. We ask for help to stop this. For the cities of Ukraine and other states to never see such evil again. So that Russia can never come to them again.

All our actions and every minute are aimed at forcing Russia to recognize the truth

The bravest people of the best country in the world!

Another week of our struggle for freedom, for the state, is coming to an end.

Another week when Ukraine lives despite all Russia's efforts to destroy us.

We defend ourselves. Hit back. We develop our relations with partners. We receive help. We ensure the maximum attention of the world to our needs. Influence the global debate. Propose and promote new sanctions against Russia. We are doing everything we can to bring to justice every bastard who came to our land under the Russian flag and killed our people. Who tortured our people. Destroyed our cities. Looted and tormented.

And what is Russia doing? What are its officials, its propagandists and ordinary people doing who repeat what they have heard on television?

They are only justifying themselves and denying. They are trying to shift the responsibility. They are lying. And they have already lost connection with reality to a degree that they accuse us of committing what Russian troops have obviously done - obviously for everyone in the world.

They say about the murders in Bucha that it is not them, but allegedly us. Although it is obvious to everyone that people were killed while the Russian army controlled the city.

They say about the missile strike at Kramatorsk that it is not them, but allegedly us. Although it was their propagandists who announced this strike. Although missiles flew from the territory under their control. And about any of our destroyed cities, about any of our burned villages, they say the same thing, that it is not them either, but allegedly us.

The Russian militaries have already lied to the fact that even after more than six weeks of war, they claim that they did not hit any of the civilian objects!

Do you know why this is so? Because it's cowardice. Total. Of everyone. Top to bottom.

They are afraid to admit that Russia's entire policy toward Ukraine has been erroneous for decades and has only ruined everything Russia had in its relations with Ukraine since previous times.

They are afraid to admit that for decades they have been placing erroneous bets and spending enormous resources in support of absolute nobodies who they thought would be the future heroes of Ukrainian-Russian friendship. And these nobodies were skillful at only one thing - taking money out of Russia into their own pockets.

In order not to admit mistakes, they made new mistakes. They deprived themselves of any political tools and, unwilling to give up unrealistic ambitions, started this war.

And, as in everything else, they accused us that the war had begun.

They seized Crimea - and we are allegedly to blame.

They destroyed normal life in Donbas - and we are allegedly to blame.

They shot down a Malaysian Boeing - and we are allegedly to blame.

They have been killing people and children on our land for eight years - and we are allegedly to blame.

They destroyed the most powerful industrial region in Eastern Europe - and we are allegedly to blame.

They ruined the lives of millions of people - and we are allegedly to blame.

They started a full-scale war against us - and we are allegedly to blame.

They have already spent almost two thousand missiles, countless air bombs and artillery shells, mines on strikes at Ukraine - and we are allegedly to blame.

They tortured and killed on our land - and we are to blame.

They deported hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian men and women, our children - and yet we are allegedly to blame.

It all came from cowardice. When cowardice grows, it turns into a catastrophe. When people lack the courage to admit their mistakes, apologize, adapt to reality, learn, they turn into monsters. And when the world ignores it, the monsters decide that it is the world that has to adapt to them. Ukraine will stop all this.

Nothing will help Russian cowardice. The day will come when they will have to admit everything. Admit the truth. All our strength and every minute are aimed at this. Defense, diplomacy, economics, information confrontation, legal responsibility - we have algorithms of action in all areas. Every government official knows his tasks and must fulfill them one hundred percent.

Next week will be no less important than this one than the previous ones. It will be just as tense and even more responsible. Russia will be even more afraid. Afraid to lose. Afraid that the truth will have to be admitted.

Russian troops will move to even larger operations in the east of our state. They can use even more missiles against us, even more air bombs. But we are preparing for their actions. We will respond. We will be even more active in providing Ukraine with weapons. We will be more active in the international arena. We will be even more active in the information field.

I will continue to address the parliaments and nations of the world. We will meet our partners, leaders of other states in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities. We will attract even more funds and resources to help Ukraine. Of course, we will justify stronger sanctions against the Russian Federation. So that there is responsibility, so that there is justice. No matter how afraid they are to admit their mistakes - tragic, terrible mistakes - they will have to. Because our courage and our truthfulness clearly prevail. And they will win.

Today is the twelfth anniversary of the plane crash near Smolensk, which took the lives of President Lech Kaczyński and members of the Polish elite. On this day, we stand in solidarity with our Polish friends and allies who are firmly opposed to Russian aggression.

I spoke today with Chancellor of Germany Olaf Scholz. About how to bring to justice all those guilty of war crimes. How to strengthen sanctions against Russia and how to force Russia to seek peace. I am glad to note that the German position has recently changed in favor of Ukraine. I consider it absolutely logical. Because this course is supported by the majority of the German people. And I am grateful to them. But I expect that everything we agreed on will be implemented. And this is very important.

And a few minutes ago, in preparation for the recording of this address, I signed a decree on state awards to our heroes. 18 defenders of Ukraine. Five servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, three employees of the State Service of Special Communication and Information Protection of Ukraine, ten police officers.

I am grateful to all our male defenders! To all our female defenders!

I am grateful to all those who restore life in the liberated territory of our state.

And I am grateful to all those who ensure our victory in the information confrontation. To all journalists, to editors, to the information marathon "United News", to all our websites, to all media representatives that do not allow Russian propaganda to win.

The truth will win! Ukraine will win! Definitely.

Defense strategy for every civilized state is to put pressure on Russia to restore peace

Today, it was a great honor for me to welcome in our capital, on Bankova Street, a sincere friend of Ukraine - Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Boris Johnson on your behalf, on behalf of all Ukrainians.

His visit to our country demonstrates as clearly as possible - there are no obstacles to freedom. There are no obstacles to leadership. Boris was among those who did not hesitate for a moment whether to support Ukraine. The leadership of the United Kingdom in providing our country with the necessary assistance, especially in terms of defense, as well as the leadership in sanctions policy will remain forever in history. In the history of the defense of democracy, in the history of the defense of Europe. Ukraine will always be grateful to Boris and Britain for this.

Today Boris arrived in Kyiv with a new package of financial and defense support for Ukraine. We also discussed new sanctions that are needed to force Russia to seek peace.

The task of our anti-war coalition is quite clear - to end this war started by Russia as soon as possible. To liberate our land from invaders. And to guarantee the security of Ukraine and, consequently, the security of democracy and freedom of the nations of Eastern Europe.

That is why it is not just the moral duty of all democracies, all the forces of Europe - to support Ukraine's desire for peace.

This is, in fact, a strategy of defense for every civilized state. To put pressure on Russia as much as possible to restore peace and security as soon as possible. To restore the power of international law as soon as possible and to prevent the catastrophe caused by the application of the law of force. The catastrophe that will inevitably hit everyone. Because Russian aggression was not intended to be limited to Ukraine alone. To the destruction of our freedom and our lives alone. The whole European project is a target for Russia.

I was pleased to hear today from Austrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer an assurance that for the Austrian state to force Russia to seek peace is as fundamental as for other responsible states.

I also heard the promise that Austria, together with its partners in the European Union, will continue its sanctions policy against Russia until the full restoration of real security in our region takes place. Until Russia withdraws all its troops from the Ukrainian sovereign territory.

In response to my question, the Austrian Chancellor also supported a clear prospect of Ukraine's accession to the European Union as soon as possible.

I would also like to thank Mr. Nehammer for handing over fire engines and rescue vehicles, as well as other equipment to Ukraine, and for helping with fuel.

There is also important news today from President of the European Commission Mrs. Ursula von der Leyen and Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau. As part of their global Stand Up For Ukraine campaign, they have raised more than $ 10 billion to help our people. To help Ukrainians who were forced to leave their homes because of Russia's war against Ukraine. I am grateful to everyone who joined the fundraising!

That is, today was a really fruitful day for Ukraine. For our diplomacy.

And this is the 45th day of our defense against the Russian invasion. Could Moscow think that such events would take place in Kyiv on the 45th day after their invasion? No, they couldn't even imagine it. And we made it a reality.

All of us, together - every Ukrainian who on February 24 and forever chose courage. Chose Ukraine. Chose freedom and the future.

In all international negotiations, in all contacts with world leaders during these 45 days, I always raise three topics. The first is concrete assistance for our defense. The second is concrete assistance for our people. The third is concrete guarantees of security for our state, which will definitely win in this confrontation.

Of course, I do not hear specific answers to my specific questions from everyone. But there are more and more positive things for Ukraine every day.

However, still not as much so that we can determine the exact date of the end of this war. Russia can still afford to live in illusions and bring new military forces and new equipment to our land. And it means that even more sanctions are needed. Even more weapons for our state are needed.

By the way, Boris Johnson was very specific today in answering my questions. Well, as always. We have already decided what help the United Kingdom will provide to the post-war reconstruction of Ukraine. The British people are ready to take patronage over the restoration of Kyiv and the Kyiv region.

The introduction of more painful restrictions on cash flows of the Russian Federation is among the priorities for our diplomacy, for all contacts with our partners. First of all this applies to the oil business. The democratic world can definitely give up Russian oil and make it toxic to all other states. Oil is one of the two sources of Russian self-confidence, their sense of impunity.

Another source - gas - will also be shut down over time. It's just inevitable. Not only for safety, but also for environmental reasons.

But Ukraine does not have time to wait. Freedom does not have time to wait. When tyranny launches aggression against everything that keeps peace in Europe, action must be taken immediately. It is necessary to act in a principled fashion. And the oil embargo should be the first step. At the level of all democracies, the whole civilized world. Then Russia will feel it. Then it will be an argument for them - to seek peace, to stop pointless violence.

And another piece of news for today. Long-awaited for many of our people. One of our main shrines will return to Ukraine. One of the most revered shrines of Sophia of Kyiv. The icon of St. Mykola Mokryi (Wet), the first miraculous icon of Russia.

We’ve been working for a long time to get it back. It was taken out of Ukraine during World War II. And in due time it will be at home - in St. Sophia. I am grateful to the hierarchs, clergy and faithful of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the United States for this decision. I want the return of this shrine to be an important symbol for all of us. A fundamental symbol. A symbol that we will return all ours to Ukraine. Everything Ukrainian.

We will bring all our people back.

And we will definitely restore justice - restore our complete control over our land.

The strike on Kramatorsk must be one of the charges at the tribunal regarding Russia's war crimes
The 44th day of our defense against the Russian invasion is coming to an end. The 44th dark day. Russian troops launched a missile attack on the Kramatorsk railway station this morning. 38 people died on the spot. Another 12 people died in hospitals during the day. We lost five children. Dozens more heavily wounded remain in hospital.

This is another war crime of Russia, for which everyone involved will be held accountable.

Russian state propagandists were in such a hurry to shift responsibility for the attack to Ukrainian forces that they accidentally blamed Russia.

RIA Novosti reported that the strike on Kramatorsk had been inflicted when the missiles were still in the air. The day before, other Russian propagandists were spreading threats to all those who escaped from Donbas by rail.

All the world's leading powers have already condemned Russia's attack on Kramatorsk. We expect a firm, global response to this war crime.

Like the massacre in Bucha, like many other Russian war crimes, the missile strike on Kramatorsk must be one of the charges at the tribunal, which is bound to happen.

All the efforts of the world will be aimed to establish every minute: who did what, who gave orders. Where did the rocket come from, who was carrying it, who gave the order and how the strike was coordinated. Responsibility is inevitable.

I spoke about this today with representatives of the European Union who arrived in Kyiv. With President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and head of European diplomacy Josep Borrell.

During the day, they visited Bucha and witnessed the consequences of the occupation. They saw how many people were killed by the Russian military. I appreciate the EU's readiness to provide the necessary financial and technical assistance to document and investigate Russian crimes. I am grateful to the President of the European Commission for her personal involvement and assistance in setting up a joint investigation team to establish the full truth about the actions of the Russian occupiers and bring all those responsible to justice.

I am also grateful for the financial support - one billion euros for weapons. Plus today we agreed on another 500 million euros for defense needs.

I held negotiations with the Prime Minister of Slovakia and thanked for the unprecedented defensive and other support. For the warmth of Slovak hearts towards Ukrainian men and women.

We also talked with EU officials about further steps to force Russia to seek peace. I emphasized that the existing sanctions are not enough. The pressure on Russia must be increased.

It is necessary to introduce a full energy embargo - on oil, on gas. It is energy exports that provide the lion's share of Russia's profits and allow the Russian leadership to believe in its impunity. This allows Russia to hope that the world will ignore the war crimes of its army. We will not allow this. Everyone in the world who has the courage, like Ukrainians, to resist tyranny will not allow this.

Russian banks must also be completely disconnected from the global financial system. Not some of them, but all, the entire banking system of Russia. It is inadmissible that the greatest threat to global security is finding its way to global wealth.

In this context, I also evaluate the new announced package of sanctions against Russia.

I believe the softness with which some in the West still treat the Russian state is wrong. We know who is constantly trying to soften sanctions proposals. And we will do our best to finally make Europe understand: in any case, you will have to impose really principled and really strong sanctions against Russia. And not some partial restriction of Russian energy exports. Not some partial restriction of Russian navigation. We know everyone who delays the decisions. But I am confident that both these politicians and these countries will change their position under the pressure of all that Russia is doing against Ukrainians and against freedom in Europe.

I addressed the Parliament and the people of Finland today. I called on Finnish politicians to do everything possible to help Ukraine. I also reminded that the best way to stop tyranny and protect freedom is to provide Ukraine with the necessary weapons. The weapons we have repeatedly asked for from the West. The weapons that are available there. I will continue to fight every day, literally every hour, to get everything our state needs.

Russia's war against our people may end in victory of freedom much sooner than many in the world think if Ukraine simply receives the weapons the list of which we have provided. Any delay in providing such weapons to Ukraine, any excuses can mean only one thing: the relevant politicians want to help the Russian leadership more than us Ukrainians.

No matter what, we will continue to protect our land and our people in any case.

Yes, not everyone in the world has found the courage we have. But we have powerful and principled partners and friends. Real friends who help Ukraine to really protect us. To really protect freedom in Europe. I am convinced that Ukraine's victory is only a matter of time. And I will do my best to reduce this time.

By the way, we also talked today about the time needed for Ukraine's full accession to the European Union.

Today we received a questionnaire from the European Commission. Finally. A questionnaire the answers to which will be the basis for preparing the conclusion of the European Commission on Ukraine's readiness for EU membership negotiations.

Our Government will prepare answers qualitatively and very quickly. I think in a week. Next is the conclusion of the European Commission, which will be prepared in the next few months. And then there will be the decisions of the member states and the negotiations on accession.

I am convinced of our success on this path. I am convinced that we are finally close to realizing our long-standing goal. Ukraine will be one of the equals in our common European home. Ukraine will be a member of the European Union. A peaceful, sovereign, rebuilt state. We will provide it. There is no doubt.

We are also preparing for tomorrow's mass event in Warsaw, which will take place within the initiative of President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau – Stand for Ukraine.

It is about the support for Ukrainians, for our migrants. All funds will be allocated for the support of Ukrainians.

People of Finland!

I'll start with what happened this morning.

The Russian military struck at the railway station in our city of Kramatorsk. At the usual train station. At the ordinary people, there were no militaries. At the people who were waiting for trains to leave to a safe area. They hit people with missiles. There are witnesses, there are videos, there are remnants of missiles, but there are no more people. At least 30 dead. About 300 wounded. This is for now.

Once again: this is an ordinary train station. An ordinary city in the east of our state. That's how Russia came to "defend" Donbas. That's how Russia came to "protect" Russian-speaking people. This is how we live for the 44th day. After 8 years of war in the east of our country.

I ask you to honor the memory of all Ukrainian men and women killed by Russian soldiers, Russian missiles, Russian bombs with a moment of silence...

Thank you.

Russia has sent all its combat capable forces from all over their territory up to the Far East to seize Ukraine. But even they were not enough. That is why Russia is gathering as many people as possible who are capable of holding weapons in order to continue the aggression against Ukraine. Looking for mercenaries around the world. Sending militants from various de facto terrorist groups and so-called "private armies" created by some Russian officials. We have seen so many of them among the captured Russian military.

Both very experienced killers and very young boys born in 2003-2004. But none of them could adequately explain why they need this war against Ukraine, what is the purpose of these missile strikes at civilians, what is the purpose of the cruelty that the world saw in Bucha and other cities liberated by the Ukrainian army.

Of course, among the nearly two hundred thousand Russian occupiers on our land were those who did their best not to fight. Who fled to Russia, who deliberately surrendered, who inflicted severe injuries on themselves to get to the hospital and leave the war zone.

But still it was a minority. And the majority of their army continues war on our land for no apparent reason. Absolutely pointless. And as cruel as possible. Continues to fight in a way that you often think - are they people at all?

Yesterday, the Russian military fired from artillery at a boat with civilians on the Kakhovka reservoir. People were just trying to escape from the occupied territories. But they were hit by "Grad". Three children, eleven adults. On the boat. In the middle of the reservoir. Tens of meters from the shore. And they are being hit by artillery...

Hundreds and hundreds of cars with gunshot traces remained on all roads of our country in the areas where Russian troops entered. Ordinary cars of ordinary people who just wanted to live. The Russian military knew for sure that those were ordinary civilians. They saw that there was no threat. But they fired.

There are many examples of such cars with people who were simply crushed by armored vehicles. Literally - crushed by tanks.

You all know what the Russian military has done in our city of Bucha. But they still make such Buchas every day - from Kramatorsk to Mariupol, from Kharkiv to Kherson.

And I'm sure you realize that if the Russian army is ordered to invade your land, they will do the same to your country. I do not wish you this. They will do what happened in Bucha to your cities. To the cities of any country that the leadership of the Russian Federation decides is allegedly part of their empire, not the land of another nation.

And even if Russian soldiers do not understand why they need it, they will still be at war. Because it is hatred and contempt for other people that are being brought up now in Russia at the state level.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

People of Finland!

You have already seen in your history the cruelty and absurdity of the invasion of Russia. Let's be honest: the threat remains. Everything must be done to prevent this from happening again.

Russia's war against Ukraine is now deciding not only the fate of our state. Not only the fate of our people. But the fate of all those who have a common border with Russia.

Like you 83 years ago, Ukraine has the courage to defend itself against the enemy whose forces far outnumber them. There are just a lot of them, in quantitative terms. They have a lot of equipment and a lot of missiles. A lot of people who can be thrown into the war. And a lot of dollars and euros earned from oil trade that are then spent on propaganda of aggression.

But just as your courage saved your country from Stalin's invasion, our courage resists this invasion. For 44 days already. But much remains to be done to win.

Of course, unlike before World War II, the democratic world has now realized that the expansion of tyranny cannot be ignored. If the people are fighting for freedom, they must be supported. But, unfortunately, this understanding is more common among nations than among some very influential politicians. Among smaller states than among some leading states.

We still have to convince the world's powerful states on a daily basis that sanctions against Russia that it will not be able to circumvent and that will definitely stop its military machine are necessary. We still have to ask for the necessary help, for the necessary weapons. And we are still told that we still have to wait for the aircraft, anti-missile systems, tanks, anti-ship weapons.

We are told that we have to wait while we are losing hundreds of people every day from Russian strikes. When dozens of our cities are destroyed. We have to wait while more than ten million Ukrainians have become IDPs. And we have to wait. When more than three million of these ten left our country...

We must do everything together so that they can return home. We must do everything to stop Russia, to stop the war! So that peace is restored in Ukraine, and the Russian occupiers leave our sovereign territory. This cannot be delayed, ladies and gentlemen.

We are told that we have to wait... But I have a question: should both those who kill our people and those who make us wait be held jointly accountable for the deaths of Ukrainians? Those who make us wait for the most necessary. Wait for the opportunity to defend ourselves, our life, wait for the weapons.

I am sincerely grateful to Finland for not delaying when this invasion by the Russian Federation began. For coming to our aid immediately. For the fact that you made a historic decision to provide Ukraine with defense support. For being principled in sanctions matters. For being one of the moral leaders of our anti-war coalition.

But I ask you to show even greater leadership, both at the level of the European Union and in bilateral relations with European countries, to support our struggle for freedom. For our common freedom.

When this war continues, when tyranny loses the war against Ukraine, it will be one of the greatest contributions to Europe's security in decades. Consequently, one of the greatest contributions to the security of your state. That is why we need the weapons that your EU partners have. That is why we need truly effective, powerful sanctions against Russia. Permanent. Such a sanction cocktail, which will be remembered as Molotov cocktails. Insist on it!

I am grateful to the Finnish companies that have already stopped working in the Russian market.

But economic ties with this country must be severed, and I urge you to put pressure on all your companies that continue to support the Russian military machine through their taxes and excise duties in Russia. All Russian banks must be immediately isolated from the global financial system.

We cannot limit ourselves to a partial response to Russia's threat to Europe and the democratic world, because freedom will not survive if the channels of nourishing tyranny are left. And we need to think together about how to protect Europe from Russia's energy weapons.

Every educated person knows that the time of fossil fuels has passed. Mankind can no longer rely on coal, on oil. We need to look for cleaner energy sources for everyone. And if Russia uses energy to finance aggression against other nations and the spread of hatred in the world, it should be an additional incentive. This should speed up the decision-making process.

How much longer will Europe ignore the need to impose an embargo on oil supplies from Russia? This is a matter of security in all senses of the word - from environmental to military.

And I urge you to ask this question out loud to everyone in the European Union. So that the necessary decision finally appears. The world knows the formats of how to do it. And if Europe does not want to physically cut off supplies now, if it is not ready, although it is inevitable, the first step must be to apply a scheme to limit the flow of money for oil into Russia. Let this money accumulate on special accounts without Russia's access to it. Let Russia first restore peace and be held accountable for war crimes, and only then take its dollars and euros from oil trade. Let it remember the spirit of Helsinki and restore the Helsinki Accords in full, and only then will it be possible to discuss the economy, if necessary.

And when we say that we need to stop the war, it is clear to all cultures and it is clear in all languages. When I say this in Ukrainian, it seems to me that there are no people who do not understand this. The same goes for German, Arabic, Chinese or any other language.

Peace is the same value for all. War is the same evil for all.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

People of Finland!

I believe that common sense will still prevail. I am confident that together we will be able to defend freedom and defend Ukraine. That is why we need to think now about how to rebuild our state after this war.

The world knows about the leadership of your country, your people in the field of education. You have really built an educational system that allows you to protect personal freedom, make a person educated and teach respect for other people, the environment and the world. Other countries should learn this, too!

During the month and a half of the Russian invasion, 928 educational institutions in Ukraine have already been destroyed or damaged. These are kindergartens, these are schools, these are universities. I invite your state, your companies, your specialists to join the restoration of our educational sector and the modernization of education in Ukraine. We must do everything we can to ensure that, even after this brutal war against our nation, our people continue to cultivate goodness in their hearts and stay open to the world. I believe in that.

Because hatred must lose. Freedom must win. First - in Ukraine, and then - wherever tyranny will try to raise its head

Being brave is our brand; we will spread our courage in the world

The 43rd day of full-scale war is over. Russia's war against Ukraine. A war that has revealed the whole truth about our country, about all other countries, about Russia and about the world in general. This war shows how much everyone did not want to notice in our country. In our people. How much the world believed in foreign propaganda and Russian myths about Ukraine, not in reality.

We have always been like that... We have always been brave. The bravest in the world. I am sure of that. Because who else would do what Ukrainians do? Who else had so much courage to constantly fight against any manifestations of tyranny and defend freedom? In every election, in revolutions and in war. Who else had the courage to fight against all Russian forces on land, in the air and at sea? Who else had the courage to go unarmed against Russian armored vehicles where the Russians temporarily managed to seize something? Who else had the courage to tell the world that hypocrisy is a bad weapon? And not just to tell, but to convince and restore honesty in the world. Who else had the courage to persuade the largest global companies to forget about accounting and recall morality? And to teach all political leaders - whatever they are - to be at least a little Ukrainian... At least a little brave.

In fact, this is our brand. This is what it means to be us. To be Ukrainians. To be brave.

If everyone in the world had at least ten percent of the courage that we Ukrainians have, there would be no danger to international law at all. There would be no danger to the freedom of the nations. We will spread our courage. We will start a special global campaign. We will teach the world to be not just a little bit, but full of courage. Like us, like Ukrainians.

There are certain results already. First of all, they are manifested in the current sanctions against the Russian Federation. But that's the thing - the results are still "certain". Not yet the ones needed to stop Russia. To stop the war.

Please note: this is not the first day that the media has been talking not about how sanctions against Russia actually work, but about why these sanctions are important. As if they are convincing themselves that they have introduced the right things, that there are enough restrictions.

But if the sanctions really worked one hundred percent, they would not have to explain in such detail why they are important.

Therefore, I emphasize once again: more sanctions are needed. Even bolder sanctions are needed.

Courage must be a criterion for evaluating decisions. Courage and practicality.

First of all, Ukraine needs weapons that will allow us to win on the battlefield. And this will be the strongest sanction against Russia of all possible ones.

We have good diplomatic news today. Russia is gradually losing even on those platforms that it considered quite comfortable for itself.

In particular, the UN General Assembly decided to suspend Russia's membership in the Human Rights Council. It is quite logical. Quite rightly. But also not without fighting for this decision. I am grateful to those states that have supported this decision. Russia has had nothing to do with the concept of human rights for a long time already. Maybe someday that will change. But so far, the Russian state and the Russian military are the greatest threat on the planet to freedom, to human security, to the concept of human rights as such. After Bucha, this is already obvious.

And the work on dismantling the debris in Borodyanka began... It's much worse there.

Even more victims of the Russian occupiers. And what will happen when the world learns the whole truth about what the Russian military did in Mariupol? There, on almost every street, is what the world saw in Bucha and other towns in the Kyiv region after the withdrawal of Russian troops. The same cruelty. The same heinous crimes.

More and more information is coming in that Russian propagandists are preparing, so to speak, a "mirror response" to the shock of all normal people from what they saw in Bucha. They are going to show the victims in Mariupol as if they were killed not by the Russian military, but by the Ukrainian defenders of the city. To do this, the occupiers collect corpses on the streets, take them out and can use them elsewhere in accordance with the elaborated propaganda scenarios.

We are dealing with invaders who have nothing human left. To justify their own killings, they take the murdered people simply as scenery, as propaganda props. And this is a separate war crime, for which each of the propagandists will be held accountable.

More and more countries around the world support the need for a full and transparent investigation of all war crimes of the Russian occupiers in Ukraine. Every murder case will be solved. Each of the torturers will be found. All those who committed rape or looting will be identified. Responsibility is inevitable.

Today I continued to address the parliaments and nations of neighboring countries, our partners, our friends. Today was Greece. Today was the Republic of Cyprus.

I thanked them for supporting Ukraine and joint European efforts to force Russia to seek peace. I urged to do more to stop the war. I urged Greece to use its influence as part of the European Union to save Mariupol. I urged Cyprus to take special measures against Russia. Such as the abolition of "golden passports" for Russians. As well as the blocking of yachts, the blocking of other Russian vessels in the waters of Cyprus.

I am planning an address to the Parliament and the people of Finland tomorrow.

I would like to note that diplomatic representatives of other states are returning to the capital together with Kyiv residents. The Turkish Embassy returned yesterday. The Ambassador of Lithuania returned today. Earlier, the Slovenian Embassy resumed its work in Kyiv.

I am sincerely grateful to the friends of Ukraine who support us exactly as we need it now, also at the level of symbols, at the level of diplomatic gestures.

This is also about courage.

And I look forward to the opportunity to have a meeting with everyone who is with us. With all who are brave. Come back. With all the diplomats who have returned to our capital and continue to work.

The presence of foreign diplomatic missions in Kyiv is a normal work of embassies, it is a clear signal to the aggressor that Kyiv is our capital. Not the provincial city of Russia, but the Ukrainian capital.

The Armed Forces of Ukraine continue to do everything to repel the offensive of Russian troops in Donbas. The occupiers’ troops in this area are becoming more active and are being reinforced from Russia. We see it all. We analyze every step of the enemy. And we will provide an answer. A tough one.

And already a stable tradition: before delivering this address, I signed decrees to honor our bravest soldiers with state awards and the title of Hero of Ukraine.

344 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were awarded. Five more servicemen became Heroes of Ukraine today.

I am sincerely grateful for the service to each of our male defenders. I am sincerely grateful to each of our female defenders!

I am sincerely grateful for the courage of the Ukrainian people.

Dear Cypriot people!

I am grateful for the honor of addressing you in this format and at this time. At a crucial time for my country and for the survival of the Ukrainian people. For freedom in Europe.

It is now being decided whether we will preserve the unity of our territory and our state.

Whether we will guarantee freedom for Ukraine and for the whole of Europe. For different countries where Russian troops can go after Ukraine.

Every day and night we think of only one thing - how to save as many people as possible. How to help everyone we can to survive Russia's brutal invasion.

An invasion that has already killed thousands of Ukrainians. Shot, tortured, killed by missiles, air bombs, tanks.

The Russian military does not spare anyone - neither women nor children. Ukrainians have not seen such atrocities since the Nazi invasion during World War II.

And I ask you... Please, just look. Look at what we have been going through for 43 days already. Please watch a short video.

---

God forbid any other nation will have to go through this…

Experience how Russian soldiers killed people on the roads in Bucha for fun. How in Irpin, they raped underage girls and then strangled them as experienced killers. How in Mariupol, a little girl was forced with gunshots to run down the street. Because it is permissible for them to hunt people, it is fun for them. How in Kharkiv, dozens of ordinary civilians were killed in a minute by the artillery shelling of residential high-rises.

When you see so many deaths every day... When killed people are buried in mass graves in your cities, just in the yards, because it is impossible to take bodies to cemeteries...

You hope and seek, and believe that you will be able to save at least those whom you especially sympathize with. At least those who certainly cannot be involved in any disputes of the adult world, in any conflicts.

Since March 10, Ukrainians have hoped to find a little boy alive, little Sashko. A four-year-old boy who disappeared when adults escaped from the occupiers on a boat across the Dnieper. There was no other way to escape then - the Russian military blocked all roads. They shot people on the roads. So the adults tried to escape from them by the river.

But the boat capsized. According to witnesses, after the shelling... Sashko was the only one in the life jacket, so we hoped until the end. We hoped to find him alive. Sashko’s grandma died. And later we found his body.

He became one of 167 children who died during the full-scale Russian invasion of our state. And these are only those about whom we know for sure.

There may be many more children killed in the occupied areas, in the cities around which hostilities are taking place. Children whose lives were taken by this war, Russia's war against Ukraine.

Why does Russia wage this war? What is the goal of Russian troops? The answer to these questions is quite clear. We have heard it many times from politicians in the Russian Federation and from Russian state propagandists. We also know this answer from those documents that were seized along with Russian prisoners of war and found in the destroyed headquarters of Russian troops. They wanted to destroy our statehood and tear our country apart.

Divide Ukraine into parts. They wanted to take as much as they could. And all that they could not capture, they wanted to weaken as much as possible, to destroy as much as possible.

Russia sought to create a new split in Europe that would meet the inadequate ambitions of the current generation of Russian leaders.

They simply do not take most countries in the world seriously. They do not respect most nations.

They consider everyone in the world either as those they want to use, or as those they want to conquer, or as those they want to intimidate.

They consider Ukraine among those in the second group. That is why Russia came to us with the war.

But all other states should think into which group they were included and what really underpins Russia's policy toward them.

I am sure that no country in the world will find two things among the answers to this question - true respect and not feigned equality.

That is why the democratic world has united in its negative attitude towards Russia. Ukraine was attacked by Russia a long time ago - in 2014. When Russia tried to divide our state by force for the first time. When our Crimean peninsula was occupied. When Russia started the war in Donbas. But then the world's response was weak, very weak. Many in the world still believed that constructive relations could be at the heart of relations with Russia. That the dialogue with Russia can be sincere and based on the principle of mutual respect.

Years have taught the world that this was all a mistake. And the invasion of Ukraine on February 24 this year showed that the Russian leadership perceived the good attitude of other states simply as a weakness.

Can such behavior go unpunished? Is it right that the Russian state and its citizens are trying to use your island to their advantage? While trying to destroy the whole nation. While trying to destroy another state.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Cypriot people!

I am grateful to you for the principled position with which you, together with the whole of the European Union, responded to Russia's full-scale invasion. You have adopted a powerful decision not to allow Russian warships to enter your ports. This really strengthens security throughout our region of great Europe.

I am also grateful to you for your financial and humanitarian assistance. For an important resolution passed by your parliament in support of Ukraine.

But Ukrainian children are still dying from Russian weapons. All our citizens still live in hell because of what the Russian occupiers have done on Ukrainian land.

Russia is still preparing plans for a new offensive against our troops, against our cities... The Russian leadership still does not want to seriously seek peace with Ukraine. In response to all our negotiating proposals, which could have been accepted long ago in the interests of peace, in the interests of all in Europe, we hear only a play on words.

This means that much more needs to be done, both at the EU and national level, to end this war. To force Russia to seek peace. Peace is an unconditional value for each of us. Therefore, I believe that together with you we will be able to provide the necessary pressure on the Russian leadership.

The Republic of Cyprus has extremely powerful tools to influence Russian society. A unique force that can be put at the service of peace. All ports in the democratic world must be completely closed to Russian ships. This must be a joint decision - at the level of the European Union.

But at the level of your state, it is also possible to at least freeze the use by Russians of all their yachts and other vessels in your waters. You can suspend the current privileges for Russian citizens. Starting from the so-called golden passports for all Russians without exception and ending with dual citizenship for them.

Probably if it is verified and clearly proven that some of them condemn the war crimes of their military and do not intend to use your jurisdiction to avoid sanctions and other restrictions against Russia, only then will it be permissible to treat these people in the old way.

Any efforts by Russian citizens subject to sanctions to circumvent these restrictions must be stopped.

All the proper work needs to be done to prepare the European Union for the imminent embargo on energy supplies from Russia.

I do not know how many more war crimes of the Russian military must be revealed, as it was in our city of Bucha, before all EU states have enough courage for the embargo. But Russia itself has chosen this path. It destroys innocent people in Ukraine.

The democratic world must stop being a sponsor of Russia's war crimes.

Of the destruction of cities, killing of children. And the democratic world must learn to guarantee real security for every state that can fall victim to aggression.

When Ukraine says that we deserve full membership in the European Union, we mean, first of all, that we can bring to our common European home exactly the experience that can make each EU state stronger. It is an experience that can give Europe more justice.

I'm sure you feel our pain. And that is why I believe that you will continue to support Ukraine, including on the road to the European Union.

On the way to our common peace.

Greek people!

Kalimera!

For more than a month now, my every morning begins with Mariupol. With what is happening in this Ukrainian city, which Russian troops are simply destroying. This has never happened in the history of Europe in all the years after World War II that a city is destroyed to ashes, destroyed completely. That it is under blockade and its inhabitants are killed with starvation and thirst.

It was a city of half a million people! About a hundred thousand people still remain in it. But there are virtually no undamaged buildings, the vast majority of buildings in the city are completely destroyed.

The Russian military destroyed everything. They blew up hospitals, maternity hospitals and apartment buildings. They even blew up the city theater where civilians were hiding from bombs and next to which were inscriptions that everyone saw - the inscriptions "children". The inscriptions seen by Russian pilots, which did not stop them from air strikes.

Mariupol is almost destroyed. I'm sure each of you has already seen what the city looks like now. After it was approached by the Russian Federation. Just ruins. This is what Russia has done with our peaceful Mariupol. But also with your peaceful Mariupol. This city has always been home to a large Greek community. The Ukrainian Greek community is one of the largest in the world. For centuries, our people have lived side by side, raised children and built the future.

The ties between Ukraine and Greece are so old that it is now impossible to find their origin. Greek poleis on our Black Sea coast, cultural exchange and trade, community coexistence - all this is thousands of years of history. Greek Chersonesus was even depicted on our national currency - hryvnia.

It is with Greece that the development of Christianity is tied not only in our country, but also in our region in general. Ukraine is one of the largest Orthodox countries, and the light of Baptism was brought by the Greeks. If someone tried to snatch Greek roots from Ukrainian history and culture we would lose a fundamental part of ourselves.

In the same way the basic things of your history, your national self-perception are tied with the Ukrainian land. "Freedom or death!" - these words now reflect not only our struggle against Russia's attempt to conquer Ukraine. This is a part of your identity that comes from our Odesa. Another southern city of Ukraine that Russia may try to destroy, as well as Mariupol.

When your foreign minister was in Odesa last week, the city was experiencing the consequences of Russian shelling, another missile attack. There are no gunshots in Odesa today. But why? Only because the Armed Forces of Ukraine are deterring Russian attacks and repelling barbaric Russian troops from their direction of attack on Odesa long-agreed by Russian leadership.

Russian troops have now brought death and destruction to where Ukrainians and Greeks have enjoyed peace and prosperity for centuries. Moreover, Russia has begun a new deportation of people from the south of Ukraine. At least tens of thousands of our people have already been deported to Russia and to the territories of Ukraine temporarily occupied by Russia. These are residents of Mariupol and other cities and communities that came under attack by Russian troops.

This forced relocation of people by Russia is not the first one for both Greeks and Ukrainians. But the Russian state is carrying it out now as if deportation is not the last one. Russia is absolutely convinced of its impunity for everything it does.

We have to stop it! We must bring Russia to justice. We must save Odesa from the same destruction that Mariupol suffered. We must find everyone, all the people deported by Russia. We must save at least those in Mariupol who are still alive and who can be saved!

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Greek people!

Filiki Eteria, founded in our Odesa, has played a role in the history of your country, which cannot be overestimated. And I urge you now, openly, to create such a new union of friends, which will be able to save the Ukrainians and Greeks of the south of our state. Which will be able to help Mariupol.

The city needs humanitarian aid! The city needs its people - survivors and wounded - to be saved. Russia has been blocking Mariupol since the beginning of March, blocking on land and at sea. It does not allow even basic humanitarian cargo into the city. I am convinced that the strength of Greece can help carry out this mission. Days are numbered.

And now I ask you to listen not only to me. Regarding the fate of this city. Please listen to the two defenders of Mariupol who are now there, right there, and together with their colleagues are trying to stop the Russian offensive. Listen to two Ukrainians, but also two Greeks as well.

One of them is forced to wear a mask, not to show his face. Because his family, his parents are in one of the Russian-occupied towns. I hope you understand.

---

I am grateful to Greece for the humanitarian and defense support already provided to Ukraine. I am grateful for the support of the general sanctions policy of the democratic world. But the war continues. The destruction of Mariupol continues. You have heard these heroes. The deportation of people from the territories where Russian troops came continues.

I urge you to use the influence of your state and your opportunities, as a member of the European Union, to organize the rescue of Mariupol. I urge you to do more to make Russia seek peace and even give up its dreams of conquering Ukraine. Because this war that Russia has started against us is actually destroying everything that Ukrainians and Greeks have created together in a long time. What will be left after the Russian artillery and Russian bombs? I will tell you: they will destroy all our common history, our common heritage.

And we will not be comforted saying about Mariupol in the future: "These are new Thermopylae". When the heroes died, stopping a large enemy army. Now we can save our heroes.

And we can also drive the enemy Russian army out of Ukrainian land. We can teach Russia and any other potential aggressors once and for all that whoever chooses war always loses. He who tries to deprive of independence and destroy the territorial integrity of states always loses. Anyone who blackmails Europe with an economic or energy crisis always loses.

Let's be honest, Russia's actions from the beginning were aimed not only at Ukraine, but at Europe as a whole. Russia is doing everything to keep Europeans without available energy. And to make energy poverty a new reality on the continent. Russia is doing everything to provoke an outbreak of inflation for many nations. Russia last year artificially created a deficit in the European gas market. And now it is doing everything to artificially create a deficit in the world food market.

It is a matter of honor for Europeans to respond to such a policy of the Russian Federation. As long as Russian troops block peaceful cities and deport people, no Russian bank has the right to make money from the world's financial system. They all must be blocked! All, not just part.

As long as this pointless and brutal war continues, no Russian vessel has the right to enter the ports of the democratic world. Why help them? For them to earn even more money for missiles and bombs to destroy not only Mariupol, but also Odesa and other Ukrainian cities?

And first of all - no support for Russian tankers, these oil carriers, which provide Russia with a constant flow of money for the killings.

Ukraine needs weapons to force Russian troops to leave our country. In particular, air defense systems, artillery systems and shells, armored vehicles and other things that everyone in the West is well aware of. The sooner Ukraine receives this assistance, the more lives we will be able to save in Ukraine.

And one more thing. Historical. Our nations have always been and will always be closely bonded. I believe that we will be able to bring peace to our Ukrainian land. We will be able to bring to justice all those responsible for these war crimes against Ukrainians, against Greeks and against all other people who fell victim to the Russian military.

We will be able to rebuild Mariupol and all other Ukrainian communities where Ukrainians and Greeks will live just as peacefully and with respect for each other as it was before.

But I also believe that Ukraine and Greece will soon live on an equal footing in our common European home, the European Union. I believe in this! I know it!

We will win everyone! But only together!

If there is no really painful package of sanctions against Russia, it will be considered by Moscow as a permission to attack

It seems that the attitude to the modern Russian state is finally changing in the world. After what the world saw in Bucha when Russian troops retreated.

Now the attitude to everyone in Russia will be simple: you support either the search for peace or unjustified massacre.

Killed Ukrainian men and women in Bucha, in Irpin, in other cities that Russian troops entered is the last argument. The last argument for every citizen of Russia to decide whether you are for war or for peace. If for war, then you will forever - until the end of your life - be outcasts and in the end you will lose everything. And if for peace, if you feel even a little bit of shame for what the Russian troops are doing in Ukraine, then now is a key moment for such citizens of Russia: you have to demand - exactly demand - an end to the war. It is better now, demanding peace, to lose something, to somehow face the Russian repressive machine than to be equated with the Nazis for the rest of your life. This applies not only to any public person in the Russian Federation, not only to businessmen, but also to ordinary citizens.

Nazism has no future. Mass killings have no future. Everyone in Russia who will not demand an end to this shameful war and the withdrawal of Russian troops from Ukraine has no future.

It seems that the Russian leadership is really afraid that the anger of the world because of what they saw in Bucha would be repeated because of what they will see in other cities, from where we will definitely drive out the occupiers. We have information that the Russian troops have changed their tactics and are trying to remove the killed people from the streets and basements of the occupied territory. Killed Ukrainians. This is just an attempt to hide the evidence and nothing more.

But they will not succeed, because they killed a lot. Responsibility cannot be avoided.

We already know about thousands of missing people. We already know about thousands of people who could be either deported to Russia or killed. There are no other options for their fate.

The situation now is that thanks to an objective investigation, thanks to witnesses, thanks to satellite surveillance of events on earth, thanks to other tools that help establish the truth we will find out all the circumstances regarding the majority of our missing citizens. Regarding most of Russia's war crimes in Ukraine.

If the world has started a debate about whether it is permissible to call what the Russian military did on the territory of Ukraine genocide, the search for truth can no longer be stopped. You can't roll it back in any way. One can only quickly abandon further aggression against Ukraine and thus try to somehow reduce the damage to Russian statehood and to those who personally adopt key decisions in Russia.

If not, if nothing changes, then it is suicide. Suicide for anyone who chooses to continue the war.

Today, Western countries announced a new package of sanctions against the Russian Federation. New investments in Russia are blocked, restrictions are applied against several systemic banks in Russia, personal sanctions are added, as well as other restrictions. This package has a spectacular look. But this is not enough.

Still it can hardly be called commensurate with the evil that the world saw in Bucha. With the evil that continues in Mariupol, in the shelling of Kharkiv, in Russia's attempt to launch a new global bloody offensive in Donbas...

We will continue to insist on a complete blockade of the Russian banking system from international finance. We will also continue to insist on one or another format of the democratic world's refusal to buy Russian oil. It is the export of oil that is one of the foundations of Russia's aggression. One of the foundations that allows the Russian leadership not to take seriously the negotiations on ending the war and on the liberation of Ukrainian territory.

Some politicians are still unable to decide how to limit the flow of dollars and euros to Russia from the oil trade, so as not to jeopardize their own economies. But that's why people go into politics. To solve such problems, difficult tasks. To solve them quickly and in a principled fashion. If you are not capable, then you shouldn’t have started political activity.

The embargo on Russian oil supplies will be applied anyway. The format will be found. The only question is how many more Ukrainian men and women the Russian military will have time to kill, so that you, some politicians - and we know you, can borrow a little determination somewhere.

It is good that the United States Department of the Treasury has suspended Russia's ability to use US bank accounts and related assets to pay its debt. It's tangible. And I'm grateful for that. But much more needs to be done to stop the war.

If there is no really painful package of sanctions against Russia and if there is no supply of weapons we really need and have applied for many times, it will be considered by Russia as a permission. A permission to go further. A permission to attack. A permission to start a new bloody wave in Donbas.

It is still possible to prevent this. It is still possible to impose such sanctions, which Ukraine insists on, our people insist on. It is still possible to give us weapons that will really stop this aggression. The West can do it.

Just as it could have applied preventive sanctions last year to prevent this invasion. If the mistake is made again, if there is no preventive action again, it will be a historic mistake for the whole Western world.

I addressed the parliament and the people of Ireland today. This country was one of the first to come to our aid after February 24. And it is one of those who shows principled leadership in the European house to put effective and decisive pressure on Russia.

As a result of my address, we have good news: Ireland fully supports Ukraine's accelerated accession to the European Union. And it will do everything to increase the pressure on Russia as much as necessary to end this war.

Tomorrow I will address the parliaments and nations of Greece and the Republic of Cyprus.

In the afternoon I held a meeting with members of the Cabinet of Ministers in Kyiv. The key issues are the implementation of the state budget and economic activity in our country. We must do everything possible to restore the work of domestic enterprises, trade activities, and revive small and medium-sized enterprises throughout our territory where it is safe and possible to work.

The economy is also a frontline on which we fight for our freedom, for our state, for our people. Therefore, we need to constantly look for ways to adapt to the circumstances. Now we need to be as creative and bold as possible in solving economic issues. It depends not only on government officials and the central government in general. In general, it also depends on all leaders at the local level, on the political and business communities.

We must all find the necessary ideas, the necessary solutions to stabilize the country's economy together. If we need to relocate businesses from certain areas, we have to do it. If we need to update legislation and give businesses more room for development, MPs must do so quickly. If we need to create special conditions for the return of people, and the security situation in a particular area allows, every leader at any level must make every effort and do everything possible to return people to such safe areas.

Today, the 42nd day of the Russian invasion has come to an end. This is not too much for military history. But for the life of a particular person - it is tangible. Right now, many of our people who left their cities, their communities after the invasion of Russia may wonder: what next? And where next? In particular, Ukrainians abroad. In particular, Kyivans and residents of other cities in the north and center of our state who moved to the western regions.

And I call on all community leaders in areas where there is no threat of direct confrontation with the enemy on the ground to do everything possible for people to return, for people to work, for economic processes to restart. To restore normal life as much as security allows.

This applies to the entire horizontal of local government - mayors, deputies of city and regional councils. Look for solutions for every district, for every region! Together with the government, together with us, with the Office of the President, together with the deputies of the Verkhovna Rada. A working economy is just as important as our brave, strong army.

The Russian occupiers continue to accumulate fighting force to realize their ill ambitions in Donbas. They are preparing to resume an active offensive.

We are preparing for a further reduction of Russia's military potential. Manpower and equipment. We will fight and we will not retreat. We will look for all possible options to defend ourselves until Russia begins to seriously seek peace.

This is our land. This is our future. And we will not give them up.

I never tire of thanking each of our defenders everyday - all our Armed Forces, intelligence, special services, the National Police, everyone who allows us to hope and believe in victory. Allows us to count on peace.

Sincere gratitude! Sincere respect!

And before delivering this evening's address, I traditionally signed decrees on awarding our heroes. 168 servicemen of the Armed Forces. And 3 servicemen from the Main Directorate of Intelligence.

Dear people of Ireland!

Tonight Russian missiles again struck the territory of our state. Foully hitting the ordinary civilian infrastructure. In particular, the new depot with fuel. One of the dozens that Russia sees as a target. And this has already become the trademark of the occupiers – to destroy everything that helps to arrange ordinary life of ordinary people. They consistently destroy fuel storage sites, product distribution centers, destroy even conventional agricultural machinery, and mine fields. They are constantly sowing mines everywhere. In every place they are leaving.

In addition, Russia has blocked all our seaports, along with those vessels that have already been loaded with agricultural goods for export.

Why are they doing this?

Because they also consider hunger as their weapon. Weapon against us, ordinary people. As a tool to dominate.

Ukraine is one of the leading countries in the global food market. Without our exports, it is not simply a shortage, but a threat of famine for more than a dozen countries in Africa and Asia. Because there will be not enough volumes of commodities and prices will hike. It's a fact.

It will be harder for millions of the poor in North Africa and parts of Asia to feed their families.

Now, it is the time of the planting season in Ukraine. To foil our planting season, to destroy our infrastructure is to deliberately provoke a food crisis. And what will happen due to this crisis? At least, it will be political turbulence. At most, there will be outbreaks of violence in regions where instability is becoming traditional, and a new mass influx of refugees who are simply looking for ways to survive will be seen.

Russia has been using hunger against our people since the first days of the war. The worst is in Mariupol. This half-million city was completely blocked by Russian troops more than a month ago. They blocked access from both land and sea. Any access.

They are blocking humanitarian goods, do not allow to bring anything – food, water, medicine. When there was snow, people could melt at least the snow to get water, but now there is none.

Round-the-clock shelling, air raids, bombing continue... There is not a single building left in Mariupol, not a single undamaged building. In the city with the population of half a million – none.

The dead and killed were buried in the yards of destroyed high-rise buildings. When they were able to do it. But in many cases it was not possible to bury. The bodies of people remained in the streets, in the ruins of houses, in collapsed basements.

We do not know how many Mariupol residents have been killed by Russia. But we know for sure that this was part of the general tactics of the occupiers. They did the same or tried to do the same with Chernihiv, Sumy, Okhtyrka, Kharkiv, Izium, Volnovakha and many other Ukrainian cities. You may not have heard all these names yet. But these are millions of people that Russia was simply trying to destroy. And continues to do so.

When you hear this, it may seem impossible. It may seem that no one in today's world would dare to do so. But these are real facts.

The fact that the residents of Mariupol drew on the sheets of school notebooks how to find where the bodies of their loved ones are buried in the city yards. The fact that the Russian occupiers shot people on the roads as they tried to escape from the blocked cities. Hundreds of cars hit by shelling are still left on Ukrainian highways.

The fact that the Russian military did not even try to remove the bodies of killed people from the streets. While Bucha, Irpin and other our cities were under occupation, the corpses were laying just on the roads, on the roadsides, in the yards of houses – anywhere...

The fact that at least 167 children have been killed in 42 days of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine. We do not yet know all the victims of Mariupol. We do not know the victims of other cities, areas where hostilities or occupation continue.

The fact that 927 educational institutions and 285 hospitals have been destroyed or damaged in the shelling by Russia. Even 73 ambulances have come under the occupiers' fire!

They bombed and shelled even churches... Even shelters, which they knew for sure that there was no one there but women and children... And that's a fact.

A state that does this does not deserve to be among others in the international community.

Russia does not deserve relations with it as with one of the normal states. It must be responsible for everything it has done on Ukrainian land.

The Russian military came to Ukraine as an army of colonizers. Their state propagandists, their politicians don't even hide what they want anymore.

In the 21st century, they see their state as a colonial empire that allegedly has the right to subjugate neighboring nations and destroy any basis for their independent living. Destroy even the very identity of nations. Everything that makes us Ukrainians...

The Russian military purposefully searched for and killed teachers in the occupied territories. Everyone who was associated with the army. They kidnap local government officials and kill community leaders. Along with the Russian army, units to suppress any political resistance immediately they entered our territory were created...

Now, when there are discussions about sanctions against the Russian Federation, I just can't hear any doubts, I can't see any indecision...

After everything we have experienced in Ukraine. After all that the Russian troops did. Even now, when the world already knows everything about Russia's war crimes against our people, we have to persuade even some European companies to leave the Russian market. We still have to convince Western politicians in some countries that we need to stop any connection between Russian banks and the global financial system. Unfortunately, we still have to convince Europe that it is impossible that Russian oil provides the Russian military machine with a generous flow of money.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Irish people!

From the first days of the Russian invasion, you are on the side of good. On the side of freedom. On the side of Ukraine. And this is also a fact. You have no doubt whether to help us. You started doing it right away. And although you are a neutral country, you have not remained neutral to the grief and suffering that Russia has brought to Ukrainians. I am grateful to all of you for that. I am grateful to the leadership of your country, to every Irish man and woman. I am grateful for the support of sanctions against Russia. I am grateful for the humanitarian and financial support provided to us.

Thank you for taking special care of our people who have sought and found safety in your land. Just think about it: Russia has already left homeless 10 million Ukrainians who were forced to flee their hometowns because of this war ... It is simply impossible to accept!

But let us be aware that Russia has not yet given up on its plans. It is still continuing offensive operations in Ukraine. It is still looking for ways to conquer all our Ukrainian people.

We must do everything together so that Russia forced to seek only peace. It seek only way to leave the territory of Ukraine and give us in peace.

That is why I urge you to show even more leadership in our anti-war coalition!

I urge you to persuade your EU partners to toughen sanctions against the Russian Federation. The sanctions that will really stop Russia's military machine.

We need to stop all trade with Russia. Russia's banks' ties with the world's financial system must be blocked. We need to cut off the flow of money that the Russian budget receives for oil and spends it on missiles, bombs, artillery shelling...

The world has long developed appropriate mechanisms. Everyone knows what to do.

The only obstacle is the lack of principled stance of individual leaders. Yet. Political leaders, business leaders. Those who still think that war and war crimes are not as terrible as financial losses.

I'm sure your leadership can change that.

I am confident that all of us in Europe together will be able to end this terrible war and restore peace and stability in Eastern Europe. It is simply impossible to procrastinate with this. The longer the Russian aggression lasts, the worse the consequences will be not only for our continent, but also for the neighboring regions of our planet.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Irish people!

Our common principles, our common fearlessness have already started a new page in the history of relations between Ukraine and Ireland. Our mutual understanding and respect is at the level where we can say: it is only a matter of time before you and we live together in our common European home. I am grateful to you for supporting the special fast-track procedure for granting Ukraine membership in the European Union. With your leadership, it will be even faster and more profitable for both our nations.

And now we need to think about the restoration of our country. About recovery after the war. We invite the leading countries of the planet to take part in the reconstruction of Ukraine. Of course, I invite Ireland to take part in this project. I do it with pleasure.

For example, in our Kherson region. Your ability to value life and people, your ability to live in communities, your economic potential – they are well-known. So let's join forces and show that Ukraine and Ireland together can do much more than the world's largest state planned to destroy.

Kyiv is now the capital of global democracy, the capital of the struggle for freedom for all in Europe

Today I will not take away much of your attention. The day was very informative. I will only briefly walk through the main points of my work this Tuesday, the 41st day of the invasion of the Russian Federation.

I continued my active diplomatic work. Addressed the UN Security Council, which convened for a special meeting on Russia's war crimes in Bucha and in the occupied territories of Ukraine in general. I said what should have been said in this format a long time ago.

The UN Security Council exists, and security in the world doesn’t. For anyone. This definitely means that the United Nations is currently unable to carry out the functions for which it was created. And only one state is to blame for this - Russia, which discredits the UN and all other international institutions where it still participates.

Well, not exactly participates... Tries to block everything constructive and use global architecture in order to spread lies and justify the evil it does.

I'm sure the world sees it. I hope the world will draw conclusions. Otherwise there will be only one institution left in the world to guarantee the security of states. Namely - weapons.

I offered to the members of the UN Security Council and to all other states that respect international law specific things that could change the situation. In particular, a global conference already in peaceful Kyiv to determine how the world's architecture can be reformed given all the actions of Russia, which is still occupying the seat of a permanent member of the UN Security Council received from the Soviet Union.

I also addressed the Parliament and the people of Spain. A state that supports our struggle for freedom and for the preservation of democracy in Europe.

I also spoke today with President of the French Republic Emmanuel Macron about the humanitarian situation in the temporarily occupied regions of Ukraine. About how we can help people in the blocked Mariupol. We also agreed that France would provide the necessary technical and expert support in the investigation of the crimes of the Russian occupiers in Bucha and other cities of our country.

We are preparing a new package of powerful sanctions against Russia for everything it has done to our people.

Now is a crucial moment, especially for Western leaders. And this is no longer about how our people will evaluate the new sanctions and what I will say about them. This is about how decisions on sanctions will be assessed in Western societies themselves. After what the world saw in Bucha, sanctions against Russia must be commensurate with the gravity of the occupiers' war crimes. If after that Russian banks will still be able to function as usual... If after that the transit of goods to Russia will continue as usual... If after that the EU countries will pay for Russian energy resources as usual... Then the political fate of some leaders will develop not as usual. My advice to everyone: feel now that the moment is really crucial.

We are preparing to welcome President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and head of European diplomacy Josep Borrell in Kyiv in the near future. Working together in Kyiv is something that will be praised by many nations of the world. And not only in Europe. Because now Kyiv is the capital of global democracy, the capital of the struggle for freedom for all on the European continent.

And I want to thank all our defenders for making this possible. For the fact that the Armed Forces of Ukraine hold most of the areas where the enemy tried to break into the country.

The most difficult situation, as in previous days, is in Donbas, in the Kharkiv direction. But we continue to do everything to ensure that our defenders have something to stop the Russian troops with.

We are aware that the occupiers outnumber us. That they have more equipment. We are aware of the attempts by Russian leaders to recruit new fools all over Russia among cadets of military schools, people with combat experience and conscripts to send them all to slaughter in another offensive.

But we have no other choice - the fate of our land and our people is being decided. We know what we are fighting for. And we do everything to win.

Today in the Mariyinsky Palace I presented the Golden Star Orders to the servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine who were awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine, and to the members of families of those who were posthumously awarded this title.

Now it is in the Mariyinsky Palace, in the White Hall, where we always meet foreign heads of state, that such important ceremonies will take place. We will demonstrate every time that our defenders deserve respect and honor at the highest level.

And the White Hall of the Mariyinsky Palace will henceforth be called the White Hall of the Heroes of Ukraine. I also handed over the Order of Courage to the family of the deceased documentary photographer Maks Levin who was viciously killed by the occupiers in the Kyiv region. During his life, he made a significant contribution to making us all see and know what is happening in our country.

Traditionally, before delivering the evening address, I signed decrees awarding our military. 292 servicemen, 57 of them posthumously

Thank you for this opportunity, with great respect from all the Ukrainian people to you.

I am addressing you with the hope that you will understand most of all our pain from the war and our hope for peace. Because for us in Ukraine now absolutely everything that is the basis of public life for you is under threat.

We are one of the largest countries in Europe. And one of the most variegated. But united by democracy and respect for every person, for every community.

I want to give you just one example of our state, of our lives. We have the All-Ukrainian Council of Churches and Religious Organizations. Different denominations, different views on public life and relations between the state and the Church are always agreed peacefully and with respect for others in the format of this Council. This is just one example, but it shows that we, Ukrainians, are committed to peace and a conflict-free environment even in such sensitive issues that in many other societies always cause controversy and conflict.

Russia came to our land with the war not yesterday and not the day before yesterday. It's been a long time. We have been protecting our country from brutal, unprovoked aggression since 2014. First - the occupation of our Crimea. Then - the war in the Ukrainian Donbas. Now - already 41 days of full-scale invasion. The worst war in Europe since World War II.

But why did Russia come to us, to our home, to Ukraine? What exactly must Russian weapons destroy?

Not just our people. Not just any basis for a peaceful life. But also the opportunity to live without a dictatorship. Opportunity to live without state violence. Opportunity to be a sustainable open democracy. Opportunity of peaceful coexistence of different religions, different communities.

The format of Russian state life does not provide for everything that is absolutely familiar to us, to Ukraine. Russia wants to make sure that only one order dominates in our entire region - tyrannical. So that any diversity is destroyed. So that it is impossible to find common ground and compromises between different communities.

This is exactly what is happening in Russia now. This is exactly what it wants to establish in Ukraine. And then in the whole region of Eastern and Central Europe.

And what will happen next?

I know that for your country, for Spain, it is important for a democratic system to be protected. For peace on the European continent to be guaranteed.

But how can this be possible now? After Russia began to allocate all its state resources to the spread of war and the destruction of any basis of normal life.

Just imagine this - mothers in Ukraine write on the backs of their young children the child's name, phone numbers of relatives with the usual pen... Why? Because if the occupiers kill their parents, there will be at least a small chance that someone will save these children.

Imagine that people now - in Europe - live for weeks in basements to save lives. From shelling, from air bombs. Daily! 2022, April - and the reality in Ukraine is as if it’s April 1937. When the whole world learned the name of one of your cities - Guernica. Imagine that in ordinary cities, conditions can be artificially created where more than a hundred thousand people live for weeks without water, without food, without medicine.

Russian troops blocked our city of Mariupol more than three weeks ago. They are destroying this city completely - there is already nothing there but ruins. More than 90 percent of all buildings were destroyed! The killed people were buried in the yards near the destroyed high-rise buildings where they lived...

Russian aircraft bombed even those buildings in Mariupol where they knew exactly people were hiding. Children were hiding...

Ukraine speaks about it every day. Every day throughout the days of this invasion. But the war continues. Russia is not serious about peace.

What is even worse is that we still do not know how much longer the war will last until the world finally does everything necessary for peace.

Really powerful sanctions are needed. The most powerful. How can we allow Russian banks to generate profits while the Russian military tortures ordinary civilians to death in Ukrainian cities? How can European companies trade in a state that is deliberately destroying our people?

I know that many of your companies have already stopped financing the Russian military machine through taxes. I want to thank you, your citizens, and your government. I am grateful to these companies, to your entire state and society for the principled stance on sanctions.

But at the same time, I want to turn to some companies, such as Maxam, Porcelanosa, Sercobe and other companies - I think you know them better than I do - to stop doing business with Russia.

What our city of Bucha, our city of Borodyanka, our other cities have experienced are war crimes. Crimes against humanity. Without statute of limitations. This is an absolutely clear basis for the Russian military and commanders to be convicted by an international court.

In these conditions, how can the countries of the world freely buy Russian oil and allow Russian ships into their ports?

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Spanish people!

Now the fate of not only our state is being decided on the territory of Ukraine. But also the fate of the whole European project, of the values that united us all. Us with you. Of democracy that united us all. Of human rights, which have become a fundamental value for all of us.

I am grateful to your country for supporting common European decisions for peace. But all of us in Europe, all of us in the world need to do even more to force Russia to seek peace. So that Russia finally starts to respect international law.

What is needed for this?

Everyone in Europe must simply stop being afraid. Stop being weak. They have to become strong. Put values and democracy above the threats that Russia spreads.

I am sure fear is not about you. But I ask you to do everything so that other European countries do not have fear as well. You can help us. Help the world. Give us the weapons we need. And we appreciate that help, that weaponry - all that you have already given us. You can support further sanctions that are needed. And you can also destroy the fear of Russia wherever you can see it.

Because democracy should not fear. Freedom must be protected. Human rights must be above all calculations. The right to peace. The right to life. The right to happiness, to free development. The right to family security. The right to the future of children. The right to a decent old age of parents. The right to respect for every community. The right to be with you, Spain, together in a European family.

Thank you for the opportunity.

I am sure that all the representatives of the UN member states will hear me today.

Yesterday I returned from our city of Bucha, recently liberated from the troops of the Russian Federation.

It is difficult to find a war crime that the occupiers have not committed there.

The Russian military searched for and purposefully killed anyone who served our state.

They executed women outside the houses when approaching and simply calling someone alive.

They killed whole families - adults and children. And they tried to burn their bodies.

I am addressing you on behalf of the people who honor the memory of the deceased everyday. Everyday, in the morning.

The memory of the killed civilians.

Who were shot in the back of the head or in the eye after being tortured. Who were shot just on the streets.

Who were thrown into the well, so that they die there in suffering.

Who were killed in apartments, houses, blown up by grenades. Who were crushed by tanks in civilian cars in the middle of the road. For fun.

Whose limbs were cut off, whose throat was cut. Who were raped and killed in front of their own children.

Their tongues were torn out only because they did not hear from them what they wanted to hear.

How is this different from what the ISIS terrorists were doing in the occupied territory?

Except that it is done by a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council.

It destroys the internal unity of states.

Destroys state borders.

Denies the right of more than a dozen peoples on two continents to self-determination and independent state life. Pursues a consistent policy of destroying ethnic and religious diversity.

Inflames wars and deliberately wages them in such a way as to kill as many ordinary civilians as possible. To destroy as many ordinary peaceful cities as possible. To leave in the country where it sends its troops only ruins and mass graves. You've seen it all.

Promotes hatred at the state level and seeks to export it to other countries through its system of propaganda and political corruption.

Provokes a global food crisis that could lead to famine in Africa and Asia, and will certainly end in large-scale political chaos in countries where food price stability is a key factor of domestic security.

So where is the security that the Security Council must guarantee? There is no security. Although there is a Security Council, as if nothing happened.

So where is the peace that the United Nations was created to guarantee?

It is obvious that the key institution of the world, which must ensure the coercion of any aggressors to peace, simply cannot work effectively.

Now the world has seen what the Russian military did in Bucha while keeping our city under occupation. But the world has yet to see what they have done in other occupied cities, in other occupied areas of our country.

Geography may be different, but cruelty is the same. Crimes are the same.

And responsibility must be inevitable.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

I would like to remind you of the first article of the first chapter of the UN Charter. What is the purpose of our organization? To maintain peace. And to force to peace. Now the UN Charter is being violated literally from the first article. And if so, what is the point of all other articles?

Today, it is as a result of Russia's actions on the territory of my state, on the territory of Ukraine, that the most heinous war crimes of all time since the end of World War II are being committed.

Russian troops are deliberately destroying Ukrainian cities to ashes with artillery and air strikes.

They are deliberately blocking cities, creating mass starvation in them. They are deliberately shooting at columns of civilians on the roads who are trying to escape from the territory of hostilities.

They are even deliberately blowing up shelters where civilians are hiding from air strikes. They are deliberately creating conditions in the temporarily occupied territories so that as many civilians as possible are killed there.

The massacre in our city of Bucha is just one, unfortunately, of many examples of what the occupiers have been doing on our land for 41 days.

And there are many other such places that the world has yet to find out the full truth of: Mariupol, Kharkiv, Chernihiv, Okhtyrka, Borodyanka and dozens of other Ukrainian communities, each of which is like Bucha.

I know, and you know very well, what the representatives of Russia will say in response to the accusations of these crimes. They have said this many times. The most illustrative was after the downing of a Malaysian Boeing over Donbas by Russian forces with Russian weapons. Or during the war in Syria.

They will blame everyone, just to justify themselves. They will say that there are different versions, and which of them is true is allegedly impossible to establish yet. They will even say that the bodies of those killed were allegedly “planted”, and all the videos are staged.

But. Now is the year 2022. There is conclusive evidence. There are satellite images. It is possible to conduct a full, transparent investigation.

That is what we are interested in.

Maximum access of journalists. Maximum cooperation with international institutions. Involvement of the International Criminal Court. Full truth, full responsibility.

I am sure that every state in the UN system should be interested in this. For what? In order to punish once and for all those who consider themselves privileged, consider themselves unpunished. Hence, to show all other potential war criminals in the world that they will inevitably be punished as well. If the biggest is punished, everyone will be punished.

Why did Russia come to Ukraine, tell me?

I will answer. Russia's leadership feels like colonizers - as in ancient times. They need our wealth and our people. Russia has already deported tens of thousands of our citizens to its territory. Then there will be hundreds. It abducted more than two thousand children. Simply abducted thousands of children. And continues to do so. Russia wants to turn Ukrainians into silent slaves.

The Russian militaries are openly looting the cities and villages they have captured. This is looting of the highest scale. They steal everything from food to gold earrings they just rip out with blood.

We are dealing with a state that turns the right of veto in the UN Security Council into a right to kill.

Which undermines the whole architecture of global security.

Which allows evil to go unpunished and spread the world. Destroying everything that can work for peace and security.

If this continues, the finale will be that each state will rely only on the power of arms to ensure its security, not on international law, not on international institutions.

Then, the UN can simply be dissolved.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Are you ready for the dissolving of the UN? Do you think that the time of international law has passed?

If your answer is no, you need to act now, act immediately.

The power of the UN Charter must be restored immediately.

The UN system must be reformed immediately so that the right of veto is not a right to kill. So that there is a fair representation of all regions of the world in the Security Council.

The aggressor must be forced to peace immediately. Determination is needed. The chain of mass killings from Syria to Somalia, from Afghanistan to Yemen and Libya should have been stopped a long time ago to be honest.

If tyranny had ever received such a response to the war it had unleashed that it would have ceased to exist and a fair peace would have been guaranteed after it, the world would have changed for sure.

And then, perhaps, we would not have a war, a war in my country. Against our nation, the Ukrainian nation. Against people.

But the world watched and did not want to see the occupation of Crimea, or even before - the war against Georgia, or even earlier - the alienation from Moldova of the entire Transnistrian region. It also didn’t want to see how Russia was preparing the ground for other conflicts and wars near its borders.

How to stop it?

Immediately bring the Russian military and those who gave them orders to justice for war crimes in Ukraine.

Everyone who gave criminal orders and fulfilled them by killing people will face a tribunal similar to the Nuremberg trials.

I want to remind Russian diplomats that a man like von Ribbentrop has not avoided punishment after World War II.

And I also want to remind the architects of Russia's criminal policy that punishment has reached Adolf Eichmann as well.

None of the culprits will escape. No one.

But the main thing is that today is the time to transform the system, the core of which is the United Nations. To do this, we propose to convene a global conference. And we ask to do it already in peaceful Kyiv - in order to decide.

How we will reform the world security system.

How we will really guarantee the inviolability of universally recognized borders and the integrity of states.

How we will ensure the rule of international law.

It is now clear that the goals set in San Francisco in 1945 during the creation of a global international security organization have not been achieved. And it is impossible to achieve them without reforms.

Therefore, we must do everything in our power to pass on to the next generations an effective UN with the ability to respond preventively to security challenges and thus guarantee peace.

Prevent aggression and force aggressors to peace. Have the determination and ability to punish if the principles of peace are violated.

There can be no more exceptions, privileges. Everyone must be equal. All participants in international relations. Regardless of economic strength, geographical area and individual ambitions.

The power of peace must become dominant. The power of justice and the power of security. As humanity has always dreamed of.

Ukraine is ready to provide a platform for one of the main offices of the updated security system.

Just as the Geneva office specializes in human rights, just as the Nairobi office specializes in the field of environmental protection, the Kyiv U-24 Office can specialize in preventive measures to maintain peace.

I want to remind you of our peaceful mission in Afghanistan. When, at our own expense, we Ukrainians evacuated more than a thousand people from this country. And it was the hottest phase. But people needed help - and Ukraine came. Just like other states.

We evacuated people of different nationalities, different faiths. Afghans, citizens of European countries, USA, Canada. We did not distinguish who needs help, whether these are our people or not. We saved everyone.

If every time there was a need everyone in the world was confident that help would come, the world would be definitely safer.

Therefore, Ukraine has the necessary moral right to propose a reform of the world security system.

We have proven that we help others not only in good times, but also in dark times.

And now we need decisions from the Security Council. For peace in Ukraine. If you do not know how to adopt this decision, you can do two things.

Remove Russia as an aggressor and a source of war from blocking decisions about its own aggression, its own war. And then do everything that can establish peace.

Or show how you can reformat and really work for peace.

Or if your current format is unalterable and there is simply no way out, then the only option would be to dissolve yourself altogether.

I am convinced that you can do without the third option.

Ukraine needs peace. We need peace. Europe needs peace. The world needs peace.

And finally, I’m asking you to watch the video. A short one.

A video of what has come to replace your power because someone alone can abuse his rights.

This is what impunity leads to.

If possible - watch this video. Because there is no opportunity for everyone to come to us and see it. So watch it.

There is ample evidence that it is Russian troops who destroy peaceful cities, torture and kill civilians

Today has been a really difficult day. Emotional.

I’ve visited our cities in the Kyiv region, which we liberated from the occupiers. Stoyanka, Irpin, Bucha.

Of course, now this area does not look like yesterday. The bodies of killed people, killed Ukrainians have already been taken from most streets. But in the yards, in the houses, the dead still remain.

The cities are simply ruined. Burnt military equipment on the roads, destroyed cars. It is especially hard to look at the traces of bullets on cars with the inscription "Children".

We have just begun an investigation into all that the occupiers have done. At present, there is information about more than three hundred people killed and tortured in Bucha alone. It is likely that the list of victims will be much larger when the whole city is checked. And this is only one city.

One of the many Ukrainian communities that the Russian military managed to seize.

There is already information that the number of victims of the occupiers may be even higher in Borodyanka and some other liberated cities. In many villages of the liberated districts of the Kyiv, Chernihiv and Sumy regions, the occupiers did things that the locals had not seen even during the Nazi occupation 80 years ago. The occupiers will definitely bear responsibility for this.

We are already doing everything possible to identify all the Russian military involved in these crimes as soon as possible. Everything to punish them. This will be a joint work of our state with the European Union and international institutions, in particular with the International Criminal Court.

I discussed this issue today with President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen. And also with Chancellor of Austria Nehammer. We agreed on his visit to Ukraine in the near future.

I also discussed the investigation into the war crimes of Russian troops with Polish President Duda. We also talked about new sanctions against Russia, humanitarian and defense cooperation with Poland.

All crimes of the occupiers are documented. The necessary procedural basis is provided for bringing the guilty Russian military to justice for every crime they commit.

I would like to emphasize that we are interested in the most complete, transparent investigation, the results of which will be known and explained to the entire international community. We provide maximum access for journalists to Bucha and other liberated cities of Ukraine. For hundreds of journalists from around the world. And we are interested in having thousands of journalists there. As many as possible! For the world to see what Russia has done.

I'm sure you know about the new old tactics of Russian propagandists who are constantly trying to reject accusations of the Russian military.

Why the new old? Everything is simple. Because they used the same tactics when the occupiers shot down a Malaysian Boeing over Donbas. They blamed Ukraine. They even came up with various conspiracy theories. They even went so far as to claim that the corpses were "thrown" on board the plane before it crashed.

Now they are doing the same thing. The same lies. They are trying to distort the facts. But, as then, they will not succeed. They will not be able to deceive the whole world.

The time will come when every Russian will learn the whole truth about who of their fellow citizens killed. Who gave orders. Who turned a blind eye to the murders. We will establish all this. And make it globally known.

It is now 2022. And we have much more tools than those who prosecuted the Nazis after World War II.

We must also be aware that after the revealed mass killings of civilians in the Kyiv region, the occupiers may have a different attitude to their crimes in another part of our country where they came. They are already launching a false campaign to conceal their guilt in the mass killings of civilians in Mariupol. They will do dozens of stage interviews, re-edited recordings, and will kill people specifically to make it look like they were killed by someone else.

Probably, now the occupiers will try to hide the traces of their crimes. They did not do this in Bucha when they retreated. But in another area it is possible.

I want to say right away: every normal person in the world understands who brought war and mass deaths to Ukrainian land. There is ample evidence that it is Russian troops who destroy peaceful cities, abduct, torture, kill civilians.

Therefore, Russian propagandists and their leaders can now succeed in only one thing:

making their work enough for the verdict of the future tribunal, which will be similar to the verdict of Julius Streicher, one of the ideologues of Nazism, editor-in-chief of the Der Stürmer weekly. He was executed for anti-Semitic propaganda and calls for genocide.

Nowadays people are not executed already. But all skabeevas, evening loudmouths, frontline liars and their bosses in Moscow should remember: the end of your life will be behind bars. At best.

I would also like to note the reaction of the leaders of the democratic world to what they saw in Bucha. The sanctions response to Russia’s massacre of civilians must finally be powerful. But was it really necessary to wait for this to reject doubts and indecision? Did hundreds of our people really have to die in agony for some European leaders to finally understand that the Russian state deserves the most severe pressure?

This breaks the heart of every Ukrainian. It breaks my heart. Because only now do we hear from all world leaders statements that should have been made long ago, when everything was already completely clear.

I emphasize once again: Ukraine must get all the necessary weapons to drive the occupiers out of our land as soon as possible, to liberate our cities. And if we had already got what we needed - all these planes, tanks, artillery, anti-missile and anti-ship weapons, we could have saved thousands of people. I do not blame you - I blame only the Russian military. But you could have helped.

I will continue to say this to the face of all those on whom the decision on weapons for Ukraine depends.

We have already started preparing all the necessary work to restore normal life in the liberated areas. Mine clearance of the territory is carried out. Our sappers neutralize thousands of explosive devices every day! In the near future we will restore electricity supply, restore water supply to this whole territory of our state. We will provide medical care, normal access to goods - as much as possible in the current conditions.

Of course, we will rebuild the destroyed and damaged housing. We will rebuild roads, bridges, infrastructure. Life will come again to every city, to every community that the occupiers tried to destroy.

This week I continue to address the parliaments of the nations of the world. Today was Romania. I thanked the Romanian people for their warm attitude towards our migrants. It's true. I called for greater sanctions against Russia. I also said that Romania's leadership was indispensable for ensuring security in the Black Sea region and for restoring justice in Europe as a whole.

Tomorrow I will address the Spanish Parliament. And also the UN Security Council.

Today I expressed condolences to the President of the Republic of Lithuania and to the entire Lithuanian people over the brutal murder of the world-famous documentary filmmaker Mantas Kvedaravičius by the Russian occupiers in Mariupol. In 2016, he made a film about our peaceful Mariupol, which shortly before found itself on the frontline of the war in Donbas. And now it was there that his life was taken. May the memory of him live forever!

We continue to prepare for even more brutal activity of the occupiers in the eastern and southern directions. We know what they are going to do in Donbas. We know what they are going to do near Kharkiv, in some other parts of the country. Russia concentrates a significant amount of military and equipment there. And this activity proves that sanctions imposed against Russia are not enough. There will be more.

If the Russian leadership does not begin to really seek peace, really negotiate peace, they will put their country in the worst condition in 50 years. The so-called wicked 90's will seem prosperous and calm.

And traditionally, before delivering this address, I signed a decree awarding our Ukrainian heroes. 152 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine received state awards, three of them posthumously

I am grateful for this opportunity to address you and all your people.

A few hours ago I returned from the liberated cities of the Kyiv region - near our capital. It is these territories from which we expelled the Russian occupiers and saw what they had been doing to the Ukrainian people on our land. And I want you to see it now. What the occupiers left behind. I apologize - the video is brutal, but it's a reality...

The name of our city of Bucha is now forever in world history. In the history of war crimes. In the history of the extermination of people.

As of now, we know about more than 300 civilians tortured, executed or otherwise killed in Bucha. Ordinary residents of an ordinary city near Kyiv. Their hands were tied behind their backs, they were shot in the back of the head or in the eye, killed just in the streets. Civilian vehicles were crushed by military equipment. Vehicles with people! They raped women and girls...

And this is just the beginning of the investigation. Not all evidence has been collected yet. Not all burials have been discovered yet. Not all basements where the Russian military tortured people have been inspected yet. There is every reason to believe that the number of killed residents of Bucha and other Ukrainian cities nearby will be much higher than what we know today.

Why did the Russian military do that?

On the same day, April 3, when the world was horrified to see the bodies of those killed in Bucha, an article justifying the genocide of Ukrainians was published on the website of the Russian state news agency RIA Novosti. Its name is quite eloquent, I quote: "What should Russia do with Ukraine". And it's not just text. This is one of the proofs for the future tribunal against Russian war criminals.

The article describes a clear and calculated procedure for the destruction of everything that makes Ukrainians Ukrainians and our people themselves. Those whom they will not be able to break and conquer. It is said that "de-Ukrainization" and "de-Europeanization" of Ukraine should be carried out. It is said that even the name of our state should be erased. Virtually, it is said that the deaths of as many of our people in the war are only welcomed.

I want to emphasize once again: this is the website of the state news agency of Russia, where, under conditions of explicit state censorship, only materials that correspond to the official ideological position on the war against Ukraine can be published. What does not correspond to such a position would simply not pass censorship.

I want you to understand me: they are not even hiding. They openly speak about the purpose of the invasion of Ukraine. If our army had not withstood, if our people had not risen to the defense of the state, they would have done what they did in Bucha - but throughout Ukraine.

We know about the deliberate killings of teachers and educators in the temporarily occupied territories. We know about deliberate terror against all those whom the occupiers considered as activists, as people related to the army.

Even the mere presence of the national symbols of Ukraine, the state flag or coat of arms, in a person's apartment was already a reason for the occupiers to kill this person or at least threaten to kill him or her.

But why aren't they hiding?

Why do they even now, when everything is clear to the world, openly say how they want to destroy the whole nation?

There are two answers to this question.

You will understand the first answer very well.

In 1989, Nicolae Ceaușescu finally ended his life. For many years it has been clear that this man had lost his adequacy. It has been clear that he, his wife, his entourage, his "Securitate" have been dragging your country and people down - to suffering, to poverty, to isolation not just from the world, but from everything advanced in the world.

That regime relied only on intimidation, repression, brutality and deception. There was nothing bright in it. The Romanian people revolted and defended themselves, saved themselves. Having overthrown inadequate power. Because that was the only way. Ceaușescu, his wife, his entourage, his "Securitate" could not be convinced of anything.

It is also impossible to convince those who promote war in Russia now. Who give criminal orders. Who develop plans for the genocide of the Ukrainian people and the destruction of the Ukrainian state. These people are inadequate. They have lost all connection with reality and are willing to sacrifice millions of lives to realize their crazy ideas.

And the second reason why Russia is openly calling for genocide and why the crimes of the occupiers that everyone in the world saw in Bucha are possible is the belief of Russia's top officials that European leaders will fail, will be weak. That Europe will lack leadership. And that the nations of Europe are incapable of defending the values that have united the continent.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Great Romanian people!

Together we must stop these inadequate people who are accustomed to impunity and therefore decided that they are allowed absolutely everything. Together we must stop those who want genocide in Europe.

Why must we do this together?

Each of you understands that Ukraine is not the last target of Russian aggression. Troops of occupiers are stubbornly trying to bypass our city of Mykolaiv to try to seize Odesa. And from Odesa there is one step to Moldova.

Russian state propagandists have long said that Moldova is also a target for Russian expansion. Therefore, the defense of Ukrainians of their own state is a fundamental prerequisite for security and independence of Moldova. And therefore a prerequisite for peace in the whole large region of the Danube.

Now the fate of the whole of Eastern and Central Europe and the Black Sea region is being decided on the territory of Ukraine. Therefore, to protect the freedom of Ukraine, to protect the freedom of Ukrainians is to guarantee the security of Europe.

What must be done?

Yes, it is true, sanctions were imposed on Russia for this war. But the war for our freedom has been going on for 40 days already. After 8 years of war in Donbas. Therefore, sanctions are not enough.

Russia must seek peace with Ukraine and with the whole of Europe. To this end, Russia must be deprived of all resources. First of all, financial and economic ones.

The European Union must finally adopt a principled decision and close ports to Russian ships.

Stop the transit of goods and any economic activity with Russia. Restricting the flow of money for Russian energy has no alternative.

One can argue about what the format should be: a full embargo on supplies or a program like "Oil-for-Food" - but it is necessary.

And not only that.

Every politician in a democratic world must defend the need to provide Ukraine with all the necessary weapons. Because it is on the battlefield that it is decided who will be the winner in this war - freedom or tyranny.

Everyone on whom it depends must do everything possible to quickly and inevitably bring to justice all Russian servicemen and their commanders guilty of committing crimes against civilians in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.

Today, I reached an agreement with the European Union on the provision of financial and technical support to the Eurojust Joint Investigation Team, EU member states and the International Criminal Court.

I believe that Romania's leadership will be one of the decisive factors in restoring justice and protecting normal life both in our region and in Europe as a whole.

I am confident that Romania and Romanian companies will also take part in Ukraine's post-war reconstruction program. We invite our partners in Europe to take patronage over a city, region or industry that has suffered from Russia's aggression. Your potential, your inner strength can create a new example of leadership in building a civilized and peaceful life.

I am sincerely grateful to all the Romanian people for their kind treatment of Ukrainian immigrants who have found safety on your land. I hope that together we will be able to create such conditions as soon as possible, when Russia will give up the war, and so our people will be able to return home to Ukraine. And this experience of assistance in emergency situations, mutual respect, kindness between our people has already become the basis for even greater rapprochement of our states, our nations.

As soon as the situation allows, I want to start a dialogue with you on a new comprehensive agreement that guarantees the absolute protection and development of our national minorities - the Ukrainian community in Romania and the Romanian community in Ukraine.

Because our destiny is to be as close as we can. Our destiny is to be defenders of freedom in our region. Our destiny is to be together in the European family.

And I believe that very soon I will be able to address you with words of gratitude for Romania's support for Ukraine's accession to the European Union.

It is time to do everything to make the war crimes of the Russian military the last manifestation of this evil on earth

Today this address will be without greetings. I do not want any extra words.

Presidents do not usually record addresses like this. But today I have to say just that. After what was revealed in Bucha and our other cities the occupiers were expelled from. Hundreds of people were killed. Tortured, executed civilians. Corpses on the streets. Mined area. Even the bodies of the dead were mined!

The pervasive consequences of looting. Concentrated evil has come to our land. Murderers. Torturers. Rapists. Looters. Who call themselves the army. And who deserve only death after what they did.

I want every mother of every Russian soldier to see the bodies of the killed people in Bucha, in Irpin, in Hostomel. What did they do? Why were they killed? What did the man who was riding his bicycle down the street do? Why were ordinary civilians in an ordinary peaceful city tortured to death? Why were women strangled after their earrings were ripped out of their ears? How could women be raped and killed in front of children? How could their corpses be desecrated even after death? Why did they crush the bodies of people with tanks? What did the Ukrainian city of Bucha do to your Russia? How did all this become possible?

Russian mothers! Even if you raised looters, how did they also become butchers? You couldn't be unaware of what's inside your children. You couldn't overlook that they are deprived of everything human. No soul. No heart. They killed deliberately and with pleasure.

I want all the leaders of the Russian Federation to see how their orders are being fulfilled. Such orders. Such a fulfillment. And joint responsibility. For these murders, for these tortures, for these arms torn off by explosions that lie on the streets. For shots in the back of the head of tied people.

This is how the Russian state will now be perceived. This is your image.

Your culture and human appearance perished together with the Ukrainian men and women to whom you came.

I approved a decision to create a special mechanism of justice in Ukraine for the investigation and judicial examination of every crime of the occupiers on the territory of our state. The essence of this mechanism is the joint work of national and international experts: investigators, prosecutors and judges. This mechanism will help Ukraine and the world bring to concrete justice those who unleashed or in any way participated in this terrible war against the Ukrainian people and in crimes against our people.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Office of the Prosecutor General, the National Police, the Security Service, the Intelligence Service and other structures within their competence must make every effort to ensure that the mechanism is operational immediately.

I call on all our citizens and friends of Ukraine in the world who can join this work and help establish justice to do so.

The world has already seen many war crimes. At different times. On different continents. But it is time to do everything possible to make the war crimes of the Russian military the last manifestation of such evil on earth.

Everyone guilty of such crimes will be included in a special Book of Torturers, will be found and punished.

Ukrainians!

I want you to realize that. We drove the enemy out of several regions. But Russian troops still control the occupied areas of other regions. And after the expulsion of the occupiers, even worse things can be found there. Even more deaths and tortures. Because this is the nature of the Russian military who came to our land. These are bastards who can't do otherwise. And they had such orders.

All partners of Ukraine will be informed in detail about what happened in the temporarily occupied territory of our state. War crimes in Bucha and other cities during the Russian occupation will also be considered by the UN Security Council on Tuesday.

There will definitely be a new package of sanctions against Russia. But I'm sure that's not enough. More conclusions are needed. Not only about Russia, but also about the political behavior that actually allowed this evil to come to our land.

Today is the fourteenth anniversary of the NATO summit in Bucharest. Then there was a chance to take Ukraine out of the "gray zone" in Eastern Europe. Out of the "gray zone" between NATO and Russia.

Out of the gray zone, in which Moscow thinks they are allowed everything. Even the most dreadful war crimes.

Under optimistic diplomatic statements that Ukraine could become a member of NATO, then, in 2008, refusal to accept Ukraine into the Alliance was hidden. The absurd fear of some politicians towards Russia was hidden. They thought that by refusing Ukraine, they would be able to appease Russia, to convince it to respect Ukraine and live normally next to us.

During the 14 years since that miscalculation, Ukraine has experienced a revolution and eight years of war in Donbas. And now we are fighting for life in the most horrific war in Europe since World War II.

I invite Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Sarkozy to visit Bucha and see what the policy of concessions to Russia has led to in 14 years. To see with their own eyes the tortured Ukrainian men and women.

I want to be understood correctly. We do not blame the West. We do not blame anyone but the specific Russian military who did this against our people. And those who gave them orders. But we have the right to talk about indecision. About the path to such Bucha, to such Hostomel, to such Kharkiv, to such Mariupol. We have no indecision. No matter whether we are in a certain bloc or non-aligned, we understand one thing: we must be strong.

Fourteen years ago, Russia's leader in Bucharest told Western leaders that there was no country like Ukraine. And we prove that there is such a country. It was and it will be.

We will not hide behind the strong of this world. We will not beg anyone.

Honestly, we shouldn’t have asked for help with weapons to protect ourselves from this evil that came to our land. All the necessary weapons should have been given to us anyway - without requests. Because they themselves realized what evil had come and what it had brought with it.

We see what’s at stake in this war. We see what we are defending.

There are standards of the Ukrainian army - moral and professional. And it is not our army that has to adjust now. These are many other armies that should learn from our military.

And there are standards of the Ukrainian people. And there are standards of the Russian occupiers. This is good and evil. This is Europe and a black hole that wants to tear it all apart and absorb.

We will win this war. Even if individual politicians are still unable to overcome the indecision they will pass on to their successors together with their offices.

And all the necessary services are already working in Bucha to bring the city back to life. Restore electricity supply, water supply. Restore the work of medical institutions. Rebuild the infrastructure. Give security to people. Because Russia was expelled. And Ukraine is returning. And brings life back.

Today I visited our border guards, our heroes in the hospital of the Border Guard Service of Ukraine. Wounded warriors.

I presented state awards to the eight of them. I also awarded the orthopedist-traumatologist - medical service officer who is a leading military traumatologist in Ukraine and has already saved many Ukrainian defenders.

In total, 41 border guards received state awards under this decree.

It was the servicemen of the State Border Guard Service who first met the occupiers with fire when they went on the offensive on February 24. Now our boys and girls are returning to the state border as we expel the occupiers.

I am sure the time will come and the whole line of the state border of Ukraine will be restored.

And for this to happen sooner, we must all be focused, ready to boldly face evil and respond to every criminal act against Ukraine, against our people, against our freedom.

Evil will be punished.

We have to fight, we can't burn emotions so as not to burn out

Wise people of a strong country!

Today we have good news. Our defenders are advancing in the Kyiv region, regaining control over Ukrainian territory.

Irpin was liberated. Well done! I am grateful to everyone who worked for this result. The occupiers are pushed away from Irpin. Pushed away from Kyiv.

However, it is too early to talk about security in this part of our region. The fighting continues.

Russian troops control the north of Kyiv region, have the resources and manpower. They are trying to restore the destroyed units. The level of their losses, even at 90%, is not an argument for them to stop. Hundreds and hundreds of units of burned and abandoned enemy equipment do not convince them that this will happen to everyone.

Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv regions, Donbas, southern Ukraine - the situation everywhere remains tense, very difficult.

This is a ruthless war against our nation, against our people, against our children.

As of today, 143 children are known to have died. Mariupol remains blocked. Russian troops did not allow any humanitarian corridor to be organized today, they did not allow "silence". Therefore, the situation must now be perceived in a balanced, wise way. As much as possible. Without excessive euphoria from success. But also without getting yourself worked up. We still need time. We still need weapons. We still have to fight, we have to be patient. We can't burn emotions right now. We can't set expectations too high. Just so as not to burn out.

I spoke with the leaders of the partner countries. It was a very active diplomatic day.

Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Johnson, Prime Minister of Canada Trudeau, Chancellor of Germany Scholz, Prime Minister of Italy Draghi and President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev.

We agreed with Britain to further support our defense and strengthen sanctions against the Russian Federation. Canada also supports a tougher response from the world to the catastrophe created by Russian troops in Ukrainian cities.

In a conversation with German Chancellor Scholz, I also paid considerable attention to the need to increase sanction pressure on Russia.

I thanked the President of Azerbaijan for the humanitarian support provided to Ukraine, informed about the state of affairs in the territories where Russian troops entered.

Italy has agreed to become one of the guarantors of Ukraine's security in the relevant new system of guarantees that we are elaborating.

I will continue this activity tomorrow. I will talk to other world leaders. I will work with international organizations, with the nations of Europe and the world.

Ukraine cannot and will not agree with the passive sanctions position of some entities towards Russia. There should be no "suspended" sanctions packages - that if the Russian troops do something, then there will be some answer...

We went through this story last year when we said that strong preventive sanctions against Russia were needed to prevent an invasion. The preventive package was not made. A full-scale war has begun. There are now many hints and warnings that sanctions will be tightened, such as an embargo on Russian oil supplies to Europe, if Russia uses chemical weapons. There are simply no words.

Just think about what it all came down to. Waiting for chemical weapons... We, living people, have to wait… Doesn't everything that the Russian military is doing and has already done deserve an oil embargo? Don't phosphorus bombs deserve that? Don't the shelled chemical production or nuclear power plant deserve that?

It is important for us that the sanctions packages are effective and substantial enough, given what is already being done against Ukraine by the Russian Federation.

If the sanctions packages are weak or do not work enough, if they can be circumvented, it creates a dangerous illusion for the Russian leadership that they can continue to afford what they are doing now. And Ukrainians pay for it with their lives. Thousands of lives.

Therefore, starting this week, we are creating a group of experts at the President's Office - Ukrainian and international, who will constantly analyze the sanctions against Russia - what they really influence.

Our goal is for the sanctions to work as intended. And so that there is no possibility to circumvent them. This must be a goal for the whole democratic world, without exception. No exception.

During the week I will speak in the parliaments of the partner countries: Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Greece, Australia. It is important that these are speeches not only in front of politicians, but also in front of societies.

In front of millions of people who want to hear Ukraine and are ready to hear it to help and support. Who feel that we are fighting for our common freedom. One for all people on our earth.

I will emphasize everywhere that no one has the right to use the lives of Ukrainians to save any income in Russia or income common with Russia. And Ukrainians should not die just because someone cannot find enough courage to hand over the necessary weapons to Ukraine.

Fear always makes you an accomplice. If someone is afraid of Russia, if he or she is afraid to make the necessary decisions that are important to us, in particular for us to get planes, tanks, necessary artillery, shells, it makes these people responsible for the catastrophe created by Russian troops in our cities, too.

Because if you could save, you had to save.

The peoples of Europe, the peoples of the world will definitely hear and support me. And all politicians should think now what they will have left if they do not correspond to the position of their people.

And finally. Already traditional.

Just before delivering this address to you, dear Ukrainians, I signed two important decrees on awarding servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine with state awards. At the request of our Commander-in-Chief, 302 of our defenders are awarded.

I am grateful to all of you for your service!

Glory to all our heroes!

Glory to Ukraine!

Today is the day when we see again and again how far we are from the Russian Federation. Imagine, they were frightened there in Moscow because of my interview to Russian journalists. To those of them who can afford to tell the truth. When journalists were preparing to publish our interview - and we spoke with them this afternoon - the Russian censorship agency came out with a threat. That's what they wrote - they demand not to publish the conversation. It would be ridiculous if it wasn't so tragic.

They destroyed freedom of speech in their state, they are trying to destroy the neighboring state. They portray themselves as global players. And they themselves are afraid of a relatively short conversation with several journalists.

Well, if there is such a reaction, then we are doing everything right, then they are nervous. Apparently, they have seen that their citizens have more and more questions about the state of affairs in their country.

The maximum contrast is my conversation with our favorite Ukrainian TV media representatives. I held a zoom conference with almost five hundred of our media representatives who are creating a telethon "United News". I am grateful to them.

Although we were limited in time, we talked quite thoroughly. I felt that everyone cares about Ukraine, cares about us and you, cares about our future. I wrote down a lot of questions and suggestions - we will work them out.

Today I supported the global marathon for peace in Ukraine. Not just a television one. In dozens of cities around the world, people gathered in support of our state, in support of freedom. That’s a pleasure!

An impressive number of people in the squares of Europe, on other continents. And this is extremely important. Because when people are in the square, politicians will no longer pretend not to hear us and you, not to hear Ukraine.

I will continue to appeal to the parliaments of other countries. The week is planned to be very busy from a diplomatic point of view. Therefore, no one will be able to hide the Ukrainian interest somewhere in political offices or in bureaucratic loopholes.

We will not let anyone forget about our cities, about Mariupol and other Ukrainian cities that the Russian militaries are destroying. More and more people in the world are on the side of Ukraine, on the side of good in this battle with evil. And if politicians don't know how to follow people, we will teach them. This is the basis of democracy and our national character.

Once again I want to thank our people in Kherson, Kakhovka, Slavutych and other cities who do not stop resisting the occupiers. If the occupiers had temporarily entered Ukrainian cities, it only means that they would have to leave.

And I want to remind those phenomenal fools who are trying to cooperate with Russian troops that they are leaving their own people behind. What will they do to other people's traitors? I would tell them: think about it. But I know that these people don’t have anything to think with. Otherwise they would not have become traitors.

Of course, this week we will work for new sanctions against the Russian Federation, against the aggression, sanctions that are needed as long as Russian troops remain on the territory of Ukraine.

A new round of negotiations is ahead, because we are looking for peace. Really. Without delay. As I was informed, there is an opportunity and a need for a face-to-face meeting already in Turkey. This is not bad. Let's look at the result.

Our priorities in the negotiations are known. Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity are beyond doubt. Effective security guarantees for our state are mandatory. Our goal is obvious - peace and the restoration of normal life in our native state as soon as possible.

The Armed Forces of our state are holding back the occupiers, and in some areas they are even taking steps forward. Well done. The courage of our defenders, how wisely they behave on the battlefield... This is so important that no words of gratitude will be enough. But again and again I never tire of thanking. To each of our defenders... To all who fight for our future, for our children, for our people.

I signed decrees conferring the title of Hero of Ukraine upon 15 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, 3 of them posthumously.

As well as a decree on state awards to 142 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and 5 servicemen of the Department of State Protection of Ukraine.

It is a great honor for me to sign such decrees.

May the memory of all our heroes live forever. May the memory of everyone who gave life for Ukraine, for us, live forever.

Glory to you all!

Glory to all our heroes!

Glory to Ukraine!

Russian troops are destroying everything that makes us a nation, but they will be held accountable for that

Free Slavutych who will not be conquered by the invaders!

Today we were all with you - on your streets, in your protest. And all together we tell the occupiers one thing: go home while you can still walk.

The Russian invaders entered Slavutych and faced the same reaction there as in the south of our state, as in the east of our country.

Ukraine is united in its desire to live freely, to live independently and for the sake of its own dreams, not other people's sick fantasies. Every day of our struggle for Ukraine, every manifestation of our resistance in all areas the occupiers have entered so far proves that Ukraine is a state full of life, which has historical roots and moral foundations throughout its territory.

Nothing they do will help the occupiers in the Ukrainian territory they temporarily entered. Disconnection of our television and activation of passionate nonsense speeches by Moscow TV presenters, leaflets with propaganda, distribution of rubles. Rubles, which in Russia will soon be weighed instead of assessing them at face value.

Bribing outcasts whom the occupiers are looking for in all the dumps to portray the allegedly pro-Russian government will not help as well.

The answer to Russian troops will be one - hatred and contempt. And our Armed Forces of Ukraine will inevitably come.

That is why ordinary Ukrainian peasants take captive the pilots of downed Russian planes that fall to our land. That is why our "tractor troops" - Ukrainian farmers take Russian equipment in the fields and give it to our Armed Forces of Ukraine. In particular, the latest models that Russia has tried to keep secret. And now the occupiers leave them on our land and just run away...

Actually, they do the right thing. Because it is better for them to escape than to die. And there are not and will not be other alternatives.

Everyone in Ukraine has united and has been devoting all their energy to the defense of our state for more than a month already. Together with the Armed Forces, together with all our defenders, together with our National Guard.

I would like to once again congratulate the National Guard of Ukraine on its day with great respect. I am sincerely grateful for everything you do to protect the state, to protect Ukrainians! Thank you for all the steps to victory that will come and that were made possible thanks to you.

Today I presented awards to soldiers of the National Guard who distinguished themselves in battles with the Russian occupiers. I also awarded the rank of brigadier general to five colonels of the National Guard of Ukraine.

In total, during the full-scale war since February 24, 476 soldiers of the National Guard have been awarded state awards already.

I also spoke today with Polish President Andrzej Duda. Twice. About our people who found protection in Poland. And the need to strengthen our common security. Security of our states. Security for all Europeans actually.

What is the price of this security? This is very specific. These are planes for Ukraine. These are tanks for our state. This is anti-missile defense. This is anti-ship weaponry. This is what our partners have. This is what is covered with dust at their storage facilities. After all, this is all for freedom not only in Ukraine - this is for freedom in Europe.

Because it cannot be acceptable for everyone on the continent if the Baltic states, Poland, Slovakia and the whole of Eastern Europe are at risk of a clash with the Russian invaders.

At risk only because they left only one percent of all NATO aircraft and one percent of all NATO tanks somewhere in their hangars. One percent! We did not ask for more. And we do not ask for more. And we have already been waiting for 31 days!

So who runs the Euro-Atlantic community? Is it still Moscow because of intimidation?

Partners need to step up assistance to Ukraine. These are the words: partners need! Because this is the security of Europe. And this is exactly what we agreed on in Kyiv when the three prime ministers of Eastern European countries, as well as Mr. Kaczynski, arrived in our capital. It was in mid-March. Today, immediately after the conversation with the President of Poland, I contacted the defenders of Mariupol. I am in constant contact with them. Their determination, their heroism and resilience are impressive. I am grateful to each of them! I wish at least a percentage of their courage to those who have been thinking for 31 days how to transfer a dozen or two of planes or tanks…

And, by the way, we talked today with our military in Mariupol, with our heroes who defend this city, in Russian.

Because there is no language problem in Ukraine and there never was.

But now you, the Russian occupiers, are creating this problem. You are doing everything to make our people stop speaking Russian themselves. Because the Russian language will be associated with you. Only with you. With these explosions and killings. With your crimes. You are deporting our people. You are bullying our teachers, forcing them to repeat everything after your propagandists. You are taking our mayors and Ukrainian activists hostage. You are placing billboards in the occupied territories with appeals (they appeared today) not to be afraid to speak Russian. Just think about what it means. Where Russian has always been a part of everyday life, like Ukrainian, in the east of our state, and where you are turning peaceful cities into ruins today. Russia itself is doing everything to ensure that de-russification takes place on the territory of our state. You are doing it. In one generation. And forever. This is another manifestation of your suicide policy.

Our representatives - the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defense of Ukraine - met today in Poland with colleagues from the United States. They were joined by US President Joseph Biden. As I was informed, the negotiations concerned, in particular, these vital interests, which I mentioned above. Concerned what we really need while this ping-pong continues - who should give us planes and other protection tools and how. Ukraine cannot shoot down Russian missiles using shotguns, machine guns, which are too much in supplies.

And it is impossible to unblock Mariupol without a sufficient number of tanks, other armored vehicles and, of course, aircraft. All defenders of Ukraine know that. All defenders of Mariupol know that. Thousands of people know that - citizens, civilians who are dying there in the blockade.

The United States knows that. All European politicians know. We told everyone. And this should be known as soon as possible by as many people on earth as possible. So that everyone understands who and why was simply afraid to prevent this tragedy. Afraid to simply make a decision. Vital decision.

Of course, we have already seized a number of Russian tanks, which the military command of this country keeps sending to be burned here.

However, the nations of the world will not understand for sure if the battlefield in Ukraine will be a larger supplier of tanks to protect freedom in Europe than our partners.

Ukraine's position must be heard. I want to emphasize: this is not only our position.

This is the position of the vast majority of Europe's population, the majority of Europeans.

If someone does not believe me, look at current public opinion polls in the world.

And if you do not want to hear the opinion of the people, then hear the strikes of Russian missiles hitting right next to the Polish border. Are you waiting for the roar of Russian tanks?

I also spoke with Prime Minister of Bulgaria Kiril Petkov. In particular, about the humanitarian catastrophe due to the actions of Russian troops and how to save our people.

I spoke today at the Doha Forum in the capital of Qatar. This is a respectable meeting that is important not only for the Islamic world, but also for many other countries in Latin America and Africa. These are the regions where Russian propaganda still has great influence. But we are working against lies all over the world. Let Russia know that the truth will not remain silent. And let every nation in the world feel the depth of Russia's injustice against Ukraine. Against everything that keeps the world within morality and humanity.

The occupiers committed another crime against history. Against historical justice.

Near Kharkiv, Russian troops in their branded inhuman style "denazified" the Holocaust Memorial in Drobytsky Yar.

During World War II, the Nazis executed about 20,000 people there. 80 years later they are killed a second time. And Russia is doing it.

The menorah in Drobytsky Yar destroyed by Russian projectiles today is another question to the entire Jewish community of the world: how many more crimes against our common memory of the Holocaust will be allowed to be committed by Russia on our Ukrainian land?

Russian troops are deliberately killing civilians, destroying residential neighborhoods, targeting shelters and hospitals, schools and universities. Even churches, even Holocaust memorials!

Russian troops receive just such orders: to destroy everything that makes our nation nation, our people - people, our culture - culture. This is exactly how the Nazis tried to capture Europe 80 years ago. This is exactly how the occupiers act in Ukraine. No one will forgive them. There will be responsibility. Just like 77 years ago. Most likely not in Nuremberg. But the meaning will be similar. You will see.

Everyone will see. Everyone. We guarantee.

Dear Ambassador Herbst, dear ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for having me here. I’m grateful for the chance to talk to you. People of Ukraine are grateful to our American friends for all the help you provide. Both military and humanitarian. Thanks for your support. It’s really vital for us.

Yesterday, after the NATO summit I was told a joke. The NATO acronym stands for Never Act, Talk Only!

They say the joke is so old that it should be called vintage.

And now allow me to get to Ukrainian. Today, it’s the language of freedom. The language of victory.

If this is true, then things are bad for us. More precisely, they are bad for NATO. Because if it reacted to Russia's aggression against itself in the same way as it had reacted to the invasion of Ukraine, Russian tanks would be standing near Dunkirk for a couple of weeks already.

And someone - we know for sure, who exactly - would probably have to land in Normandy again soon.

But NATO is lucky - these tanks are now being disposed of in Ukraine.

But the thing is Ukraine is not made for this.

Ukraine has other plans, its own plans. To develop. To build. To continue reforms. To improve life. These plans are not just paused. For thousands of people, they will never come true. They may never come true for our entire state.

After all, the war that Russia is waging against us is not just a war for territory or resources. This is a punitive war. Caused by the desire to return the apostates who rebelled against the "Russian world". Or to destroy them.

For the Putin regime, Ukraine is a heresy. Literally. And the war against it is a religious war.

So this is a war of annihilation. Russia's goal is to destroy Ukraine. As a people living by their own customs. As a political nation that chooses its own values. As a sovereign state that determines its own path.

There is no exaggeration in these words. They must be taken literally. Because this is exactly what the Russian leadership meant when it has been talking about "one nation" for years. About Ukraine as a "historical phantom" and "not even a state".

Henry Kissinger, a man I respect very much, has grasped very clearly the essence of Russia's attitude toward Ukraine.

I quote in the original language: “The West is trying to establish the legality of any established border. For Russia, Ukraine is part of the Russian patrimony”.

Now the world is promoting the "Give Peace a Chance" campaign, and there are calls for reconciliation between Ukraine and Russia. We did not start this war. We want its end more than anyone in the world. We are making an incredible effort to do so. In particular, the diplomatic one.

However, the word "reconciliation" is completely inappropriate here. It indicates parity and equality of the parties. We see an emphasis on supremacy on the part of Russia. And the intention to continue on the path of violence and destruction.

The Kremlin's aggressive plans are failing. The blitzkrieg failed. No strategic task of the invading force was fulfilled even during the month of fighting.

They believed that the invasion of Ukraine would be an easy walk. They believed that they would quickly stifle our desire for freedom. Well, they have a lot of experience in this. They have Berlin 53rd, Budapest 56th, Prague 68th… But they have forgotten that the CSTO is a pale shadow of the Warsaw Pact. Russia is a pale shadow of the USSR. But it still has very large resources. In particular human resources.

Half a million soldiers subdued Czechoslovakia. 200,000 have been sent to seize Ukraine. Yet. And a new wave of invasion is approaching. And maybe it will be bigger. In Russia, covert mobilization continues. Russia's allies are trying to avoid participating in its aggression. But blackmail and provocations can still force them. And this means we will have to defend ourselves further.

But it is already quite obvious: the Russian leadership has miscalculated about Ukraine. Miscalculated at each point. Because the line "we will lay down our souls and bodies for our freedom" is not just solemn words from our national anthem. This is the Ukrainian national idea. We do not just believe that freedom is the highest value. We know that. In 2014, this knowledge was embodied in the slogan "Ukraine is Europe". Of course, this is not about geography - everything is obvious about it. It's about values.

But today Ukraine is the Grail of Europe. Without exaggeration. Because it is Ukraine who revives the principles that gave life to the current civilization of the West. You can't exchange freedom for comfort. You cannot buy resources for justice and human rights. Cannibalism cannot be justified by originality. You cannot be afraid to call evil evil. You can't be afraid of evil.

We are not afraid. And this is what makes Ukraine an antagonist of Russia. The anti-Russia that Putin talks about all the time. And in this sense, our state is an indisputable existential threat to him. Because his loss in Ukraine will mean the collapse of the regime. And success will only strengthen it.

Terror is the basis of his regime. Terror is the basis of Russian statehood. Terror is the basis of Russia's military strategy. Russia is a terrorist state.

The Russian armed forces are destroying our cities not only because of technical backwardness and lack of high-precision ammunition. They are doing it to cause horror. Phosphorus bombs dropped on the Kyiv region are not about military superiority. The methodical destruction of Mariupol is not about military superiority.

There were more people in Mariupol before the war than in Miami. Imagine Miami without water. Without access to medication. Without food. Imagine Miami being turned to dust every day. Together with residents who are not allowed to evacuate. Neighborhood after neighborhood. Schools. Theater. Maternity hospital. Without any military sense. Just to intimidate.

They are destroying civilian infrastructure and using unconventional weapons to cause a humanitarian catastrophe. They resort to chemical and nuclear blackmail - the threat of environmental catastrophes due to sabotage at the captured Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plants remains extremely high.

They are hiding behind civilians. Tens of thousands of them are being taken hostage and taken to work in the depressed regions of Russia. They call it evacuation. In fact, it is an abduction.

That is why I call on the partners: it is time to recognize the Russian Federation as a terrorist state. Officially. It is time to recognize the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation as a terrorist organization. It is time to recognize them as a criminal organization.

But this, apparently, will not happen as long as the seat in the UN Security Council is illegally occupied by a state that has carried out aggression against one of the founding states of the United Nations.

This will not happen as soon as the world's largest and most powerful defense alliance is most concerned about avoiding confrontation with a regime that has been breaking the world's security system for years.

The attack on Ukraine has become a vivid completion of this process.

That's why we have to endure. For ourselves. And for the world. Because it will only get worse. Unpunished tyrannies multiply lawlessness. They do not need the rule of law. They recognize only the rule of force.

Russia understands only the language of power. Its success in Ukraine will only strengthen the Kremlin's claims. On the territory. On the restoration of the Soviet sphere of influence. On the right to dictate to other nations how to live.

Ukraine will hold on. For us, this war is a people's war. Therefore, we will not give up our sovereignty or territories.

But we cannot afford Pyrrhic victory. You can't afford that. Destroyed and bloodless Ukraine will cease to be what it is today. It will cease to be an advanced bastion of the European fortress.

To survive, we need very specific things. You know what I'm talking about. But we have to remind people about it every time.

I'll start with the simplest. It is very important to be in time in war. It is important to have time. The more the better. Give it to us. We really need to share intelligence in real time. A clear and complete picture of Russia's actions is very much needed. This is extremely important for our defense.

Two factors are bringing our victory closer. The first is our resilience. Courage of every fighter. Every volunteer. Every citizen. The second has many names - Javelin, Stinger, Mark-19 and so on.

But small arms and portable weapons, no matter how modern, are of limited effectiveness. Without a full-fledged Lend-Lease, without heavy weapons - long-range artillery, MLRS, etc. - the defensive war against Russia will turn into a guerrilla war. Simply due to the number of its mobilization reserves. This increases the risk of a humanitarian catastrophe and is guaranteed to increase the outflow of refugees. We must avoid this at any cost.

Finally, we need to close the sky. Here we see several options. And they all depend primarily on the political will of the parties. The basic option is to transfer Soviet and Russian-made fighter jets and long-range air defense systems to Ukraine. Relevant reserves are in Poland, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Greece. They could hand them over to us, and the United States could strengthen their defense by providing a replacement. The temporary deployment of Patriot systems and air police missions could protect these countries from hostile actions and provocations from Russia due to the transfer of weapons to us.

The vast majority of citizens of the United States and other countries stand for increasing support for Ukraine. Including the military support. And the number of such people is growing every week. It is time for politicians to listen to the opinion of their own people as soon as possible.

Russia's success is ensured by fear. It is fear that motivates it to further aggression. It is restrained only by determination. And it's time to show it. Do not give in to blackmail. Don't give in to panic. Don't give in to terrorists.

Ukraine will resist. Ukraine will continue to fight. Not only against the aggressor. But also for the future. For reliable guarantees of post-war security. We are not satisfied with any configuration that threatens the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We will not be satisfied with a compromise on Russian terms. The victim of aggression must not pay for peace. The aggressor must be deprived of the opportunity to attack again. That is why we call on our partners and allies to find a format that will work effectively and for a long time. We have learned the lessons of the Budapest Memorandum. We have paid very dearly for them. This war has totally destroyed the entire old system of international security. We need to build a new one now. And Ukraine has proved that it deserves to be not only its participant and founder, but also its leading participant. And we continue to pay dearly for this right.

And now it's time for the aggressor to pay. We call for the sanctions regime to be strengthened. We call for the strict observance of sanctions. We call for the introduction of mechanisms that will make it impossible for international companies to circumvent sanctions. Give the world a model that will deprive Russia of the opportunity to pursue an aggressive policy for many years to come. Not only after the end of the active phase of hostilities on the territory of Ukraine.

We call for an embargo on Russian energy. We call for the reduction of opportunities of gray and black imports to Russia through the CSTO and the Eurasian Union.

Russia is not a trade or agricultural state, but a military one, and its vocation is to be a menace to the world. These words belong to Emperor Alexander II. But every ruler of Russia could say them. And especially - the current ruler.

It's time to stop this wheel of history. Before he does that.

Everything will be Ukraine

Strong people of the best country in the world!

I want to begin this address with words of congratulations. On my own behalf and on your behalf, on behalf of all our citizens of Ukraine to the employees of the Security Service of Ukraine. Today is their day.

30 years ago, on March 25, the Security Service of our state was founded.

The Service has come a long way. And we all know that. But we also know that during the eight years of the war in Donbas and during the 30 days of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, many members of the Security Service have shown themselves from the best - heroic - side.

They have shown themselves principled, courageous and able to inflict losses on the enemy that the enemy does not expect. This is exactly what Ukraine needs now.

I am grateful to all our heroes from the Security Service of Ukraine. I am grateful to everyone in the Service who during 30 years of our common history broke the plans of enemies and worked in the interests of the Ukrainian people only.

Congratulations on the holiday! Respect to everyone!

And we will always remember all the employees of the Service who died for Ukraine while performing tasks to counter Russian aggression.

During this month of hostilities, 77 employees of the Security Service were awarded state awards. Two of them were posthumously awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine. Both distinguished themselves in the battles near Makariv, Kyiv region. Thanks to their courageous actions, the enemy headquarters and more than 20 occupiers were destroyed.

I can't tell you the names of our heroes. This is the specifics of the service. But I can say with confidence: the memory of them will truly be eternal!

Today I signed a decree on state awards to 63 law enforcement officers of Ukraine. Seven of them were awarded posthumously.

Police, rescuers, border guards, special service officials of the State Bureau of Investigation and employees of the Court Protection Service. Thank you to everyone!

Over the past week, our heroic Armed Forces have dealt powerful blows to the enemy, significant losses. They say that the Minister of Defense of Russia has disappeared somewhere… I wonder if he personally wanted to visit Chornobaivka?

I am grateful to our defenders who showed the occupiers that the sea will not be calm for them even when there is no storm. Because there will be fire. As on those Russian ships that departed this week on the famous route from the port of Berdyansk.

I want to warn all traitors of Ukraine who sided with the enemy in Crimea years ago. You switched sides because you thought you would live better, right? Not because you want to repeat the tragic fate of your colleagues who died on those ships or somewhere else on land or at sea in Ukraine. Well, live. Stay as far away from our cities and our army as possible.

The number of Russian casualties in this war has already exceeded 16,000 killed. Among them are senior commanders. There have not been reports about killed Russian colonels-general or admirals yet. But the commander of one of the occupying armies and deputy commander of the Black Sea Fleet are already there.

The Armed Forces continue to repel enemy attacks in the south of the country, in Donbas, in the Kharkiv direction and in the Kyiv region.

By restraining Russia's actions, our defenders are leading the Russian leadership to a simple and logical idea: talk is necessary. Meaningful. Urgent. Fair. For the sake of the result, not for the sake of the delay.

16,000 Russian servicemen have already died. For what? What does it give and to whom?

The conversation must be meaningful. Ukrainian sovereignty must be guaranteed. Ukraine's territorial integrity must be ensured. That is, the conditions must be fair. And the Ukrainian people will not accept others.

During the week we managed to establish 18 humanitarian corridors. A total of 37,606 people were rescued from the blocked cities.

In particular, 26,477 Mariupol residents were evacuated from Mariupol to Zaporizhzhia via the humanitarian corridor. The situation in the city remains absolutely tragic. The Russian military does not allow any humanitarian aid into the city. They only use Mariupol residents in fakes for their propagandists. Pretending to start giving something to people.

I will continue to inform the nations of other countries in great detail about such disgusting cynicism of the occupiers, about all the war crimes of Russia against the civilians of our heroic Mariupol and other cities of Ukraine. It is very important. I want to emphasize: not only politicians and government officials, but nations. Everyone on the planet needs to know what Russia is doing. So that the responsibility for crimes against the Ukrainian people becomes inevitable and as severe as possible for the Russian military.

During the week alone, I addressed the parliaments of Italy, Japan, France and Sweden. I spoke at the summits of NATO, the G7 and the leaders of the European Union.

Each of these speeches attracted maximum attention in the respective countries and in the world as a whole. The reviews show that the Ukrainian position was heard. And this is my main goal in such speeches.

You know perfectly well what a powerful system of state propaganda Russia has built. They have spent and are spending tens of billions of dollars on it. Probably no one in the world has ever spent such crazy money on lies. But they did not take into account one thing. Where the path of lies needs to be paved with money and the result is not guaranteed, the path of truth is difficult, but the path of truth paves itself. The main thing is to be honest.

Next week I will continue this important work for our interests. Interests of Ukraine. Interests of freedom and independence.

I had a conversation today with Turkish President Erdoğan. The results of the NATO summit were discussed. Of course, we also talked about the efforts that could bring peace closer to Ukraine and end this senseless Russian invasion of a foreign land.

There is important news from our government officials.

First. They have already started paying pensions for April. In particular, the Pension Fund has transferred to Oschadbank the entire amount of pensions for the Chernihiv and Luhansk regions. Tomorrow people will have money on their bank cards and Ukrposhta will deliver cash.

Tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, the payment of April pensions will continue in other regions of Eastern and Central Ukraine. The other day a wave of payments will cover the entire state.

This is one of our priorities: the Ukrainian state has fulfilled and will fulfill all obligations to our citizens, to our pensioners.

Second. Under the eSupport program, more than 20 billion hryvnias have already been paid to people who have lost their jobs or the opportunity to have business. The amount of payment is 6,500 hryvnias.

Third. Officials are preparing a new support program for our IDPs from the war zones.

Regional administrations have been given a clear task to quickly allocate land for the construction of temporary housing for displaced persons. I want to emphasize once again - this is temporary housing. Once we establish peace, we will begin the immediate, large-scale reconstruction of our state. But now people need a temporary home. Their home.

And it is better to have a home in Ukraine than somewhere abroad. We pay aid, we give a job. Native people. Native country. All the details of this support program will be presented by Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal.

And a few more words about the path of truth. About those who bring you and us true information about everything that is happening in our country.

I would like to express special gratitude to our journalists today. To all those who ensure the work of the national telethon "United News", to all our media people. Correspondents, presenters, editors, media managers, cameramen, directors, video editors, make-up artists, producers - everyone without whom it is impossible to imagine television. Everyone who united and together with other defenders of our people provides Ukrainians with truthful information and, last but not least, confidence 24/7.

I am grateful to all of you! And, I'm sure, I can say this on behalf of all Ukrainians.

If Russia had known what it would face in Ukraine, it would have definitely been afraid to come here

It's already night, but we're working. The country must move towards peace, move forward.

With each day of our defense, we are bringing the peace we need so much closer. We are bringing victory closer. Because in this war it is simply impossible for us not to win. And it will be so. And we can't stop even for a minute. Because every minute is about our destiny, about our future. About whether we live or not.

The 30th day. It's been a month! If Russia had known it would face that, I’m sure they would have definitely been afraid to come here.

During this month, we’ve withstood all the main directions of Russian strikes. The world has applied destructive sanctions. And we are reaching an agreement on new ones.

Today I have delivered some important speeches. To the participants of the NATO summit, the G7 summit, to the summit of the leaders of the European Union. To the Swedish Parliament. All this is for the sake of support for our state. We need it for our protection.

I spoke with the President of Lithuania, Mr. Nausėda, Prime Minister of Israel Bennett and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Johnson. All this is for Russia to understand one thing: it is necessary to seek peace. Russia also needs to seek peace.

I informed the President of Egypt about the current situation.

And today I signed some very important decrees.

On awarding the title of Hero of Ukraine to seven servicemen of the National Guard, to five of them, unfortunately, posthumously.

Also on state awards to 240 servicemen of the National Guard of Ukraine and 119 servicemen of the Armed Forces.

On state awards to 14 heads of local communities, local authorities.

On state awards to 31 medical workers.

And on awarding the honorary title "The Hero City of Ukraine" to four more cities: Bucha, Irpin, Okhtyrka, Mykolaiv.

You know, after signing these decrees, I felt that it would really be worthwhile to award and confer the title of hero to millions and millions of our people. To you, to all Ukrainians who are doing everything they can for the sake of victory. For peace. In a place where they are.

And I am grateful to each and every one of you. To each and everyone for this month of great struggle. And, of course, to our Armed Forces, of course, the National Guard, our border guards, doctors, rescuers, territorial defense, reconnaissance officers, special services and many, many people, representatives of other professions who save our lives. Who protects our free Ukraine.

Greetings to all of you, greetings to all our friends, friends of Ukraine!

Greetings to all who support freedom!

Mr. President of the European Council, my friend Charles, I congratulate you and congratulate all of us on your re-election. I think this is very important and this is right.

I am grateful for the opportunity to address you and the nations of Europe.

Today it’s already been a month since the Russian invasion. After 8 years of aggression in Donbas. The month of the great war.

In short, about its chronicle. Because everything is in my head and everything is fragments. Unfortunately, tragic ones.

It all started on February 24. From Russia. When the missiles flew. Early in the morning. Against our peaceful cities. People have still been sleeping. Death has already come.

Russia sent armored vehicles against us. Brought several thousand tanks to Ukraine.

It’s hard to count how many of them have already been burned. How many can still kill us.

Bombs fell on our people. From planes that took off from Belarus. And they didn't even admit that they did it.

Russia captured the Chornobyl NPP. Staff have not been released for 24 days there. Imagine, people lived 24 days at such a facility, worked at such a facility. These are our people.

So that nothing terrible happens in Chornobyl again. To prevent the catastrophe.

And the Russian military held them hostage.

Russian tanks fired at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant.

Russia fired missiles at Babyn Yar.

It has already destroyed more than 230 schools and 155 kindergartens. Killed 128 children. Fired missiles at universities. Burns residential neighborhoods with rocket artillery.

Whole cities, villages. Just to ashes. Nothing remains. The Russian military killed journalists. Although they saw the inscription "Press" on them. They may not have been taught to read. Only to kill.

Russia has blocked Mariupol. This is a blockade that no one could have imagined in our time. Hundreds of thousands of people without water, without food. Under constant shelling, under constant bombing.

The Russian militaries deliberately blow up hospitals, maternity hospitals, shelters. They even blow up shelters, imagine! Knowing for sure that people are hiding there.

They killed 96-year-old Borys Romanchenko in Kharkiv. A Russian projectile flew into his apartment. Into the apartment of a man who survived the Nazi concentration camps, but could not survive Russia that went to our Ukrainian Kharkiv. Thank God, our military stopped Russia there.

Russian troops are using phosphorus bombs - it was this morning. Rape women. Loot houses. Destroy churches! All churches. Even those of the Moscow Patriarchate.

Abducted more than 2,000 children from Ukraine. We don't know where our children are, where our 2,000 children are. Fire at humanitarian convoys. They don't care who's there. Children, women, church representatives who accompany the humanitarian cargo.

They kill people in Donetsk and say it's us. They say it's us, the "nationalists".

Russia is doing all this. For a month already. On our land.

And Ukraine? What is Ukraine doing?

It did not go to a foreign land. Never dreamed of any war. Shoots down missiles. Urges strangers to lay down their arms and return home. For the sake of life.

Do you understand? For the sake of life. Not death.

Heals and feeds war prisoners. Allows them to contact their relatives by phone. Collects the corpses of Russian soldiers from the fields, which they simply leave, abandon. Hundreds and hundreds.

Ukraine has united for peace. And for the sake of peace it unites the world. Tries to unblock the besieged cities.

Maintains the safe operation of nuclear power plants. Even in the presence of the occupiers.

Calls on the IAEA to intervene and patiently explains to the international bureaucracy what is happening. Evacuates people from dangerous areas. Does not stop trying to deliver humanitarian aid. Records Russian war crimes. Gathers evidence.

Invites journalists. Maintains the functioning of all institutions of a normal state.

Defends its own country!

And every morning... Do you hear me? Every morning, the whole state, the whole of Ukraine - children, grandparents - everyone honors the memory of all those who died for our state with a moment of silence.

Have you heard anything like this on Russian television? Have you seen this in their schools?

They are even ashamed of the word "war". They call it a "special operation".

Although they organized a massacre here, as the Nazis did. These are different worlds. We and they.

These are different values. This is a different attitude to life. The Russian military does not see what dignity is. They do not know what conscience is. They do not understand why we value our freedom so much. This is what determines how the country will live.

And who should be in Europe.

And what about the European Union?

I want to thank you - you are united, united around us. But I want to say that it was done in one way or another. But once again, the main thing is that you have united.

And we really appreciate that. You have applied sanctions. We are grateful. These are powerful steps.

But it was a little late. Because if it had been preventive, Russia would not have gone to war. At least no one knows for sure. There was a chance.

You blocked Nord Stream 2. We are grateful to you. And rightly so. But it was also a little late. Because if it had been in time, Russia would not have created a gas crisis. At least there was a chance.

And now you and I are preparing Ukraine's membership in the European Union. Finally.

Here I ask you - do not be late. Please. Because during this month you have compared these worlds, and you see everything. You saw who is worth what. And you saw that Ukraine should be in the EU in the near future.

At least you have everything for that. And we have this chance.

Lithuania stands for us. Latvia stands for us. Estonia stands for us. Poland stands for us. France - Emanuel, I really believe that you will stand for us. Slovenia stands for us. Slovakia stands for us. The Czech Republic stands for us. Romania knows what dignity is, so it will stand for us at the crucial moment. Bulgaria stands for us. Greece, I believe, stands with us. Germany... A little later. Portugal - well, almost… Croatia stands for us. Sweden - yellow and blue should always stand together. Finland - I know you are with us. The Netherlands stands for the rational, so we’ll find common ground. Malta - I believe we will succeed. Denmark - I believe we will succeed.

Luxembourg - we understand each other. Cyprus - I really believe you are with us.

Italy - thank you for your support! Spain - we’ll find common ground. Belgium - we will find arguments. Austria, together with Ukrainians, it is an opportunity for you. I'm sure of it. Ireland - well, almost.

Hungary... I want to stop here and be honest. Once and for all.

You have to decide for yourself who you are with. You are a sovereign state. I’ve been to Budapest. I adore your city. I have been many times - very beautiful, very hospitable city. And people, too. You have had tragic moments in your life. I visited your waterfront. I saw this memorial… Shoes on the Danube Bank. About mass killings. I was there with my family.

Listen, Viktor, do you know what's going on in Mariupol?

Please, if you can, go to your waterfront.

Look at those shoes. And you will see how mass killings can happen again in today's world. And that's what Russia is doing today. The same shoes. In Mariupol, there are the same people. Adults and children. Grandparents. And there are thousands of them. And these thousands are gone.

And you hesitate whether to impose sanctions or not? And you hesitate whether to let weapons through or not?

And you hesitate whether to trade with Russia or not?

There is no time to hesitate. It's time to decide already.

We believe in you. We need your support. We believe in your people.

We believe in the European Union.

And we believe that Germany will also be with us at the crucial moment.

The world's greatest democracies represented by you!

First of all, I would like to thank Chancellor Scholz and the German presidency for the opportunity to address you today. At this urgent summit.

Today is exactly one month since the beginning of the full-scale invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation. Russia, which was present at this format together with advanced democracies. Then the G7 was the G8. And there were a lot of hopes for its participation, for a dialogue with Russia. I want to emphasize that most of those hopes, as well as the place next to the Group of Seven, Russia received in advance. And it still hasn't deserved this advance.

But this and other similar advances gave the Russian leadership the impression that they would get away with anything.

In recent years, the Russian state has created so many crises and such instability that it has now become a major problem for the world. A problem that is only growing.

And you and I still have no idea how many more such urgent summits will have to be held before the problems created by Russia are resolved.

Europe is going through a war, every day of which is full of war crimes of Russian troops.

This morning I received information that Russian troops had used phosphorus bombs against civilians in Ukraine.

The threat of large-scale use of chemical weapons by Russia on the territory of Ukraine is quite real.

We are trying to find out the exact number of deported Ukrainians. People who are forcibly deported to Russia on a daily basis are deprived of documents, means of communication - everything is taken away - and distributed among their regions. And even then Russia tries to mobilize them into its army!

It illegally abducts children. According to our data, more than two thousand already!

Ukrainian cities - Mariupol, Kharkiv, Chernihiv, Okhtyrka and other cities - look like a global catastrophe. They are ruined. The roads from these cities, which people used to escape, resemble the set of a post-apocalyptic movie with hundreds of burned and shot cars.

But it is true: there is a global catastrophe! Russia has destroyed the global security architecture and dealt a powerful blow to international relations.

But this is just the beginning. This war may be followed by a global food crisis. The longer there is no peace on Ukrainian land, the less food the world market will receive from Ukraine. Consequently, many countries in Asia, Africa, and even Europe, may have extraordinary problems with access to basic products, with food prices. This will definitely result in political destabilization. Maybe this is also the goal of the Russian leadership? I do not know.

We must all act immediately! Immediately stop Russian troops, remove them from the territory of Ukraine.

Peace is needed immediately before the world faces an even greater level of problems.

It is better now to tighten sanctions against Russia as much as necessary to stop its military machine than to deal with the consequences of the food and political security global crisis. Unprecedented challenges!

If so, a full embargo on trade with Russia is needed. It is necessary to deprive Russia of the opportunity to use GPS in war. It is very important. So that this system does not help Russian missiles and bombs destroy peaceful cities.

Russian banks and, most importantly, the Central Bank of Russia must get a complete blockade from the global financial system. War criminals should be left without money at all! And their frozen assets should turn, inter alia, into reparations for the reconstruction of Ukraine.

It is better to give Ukraine the kind of weaponry support we really need now than to look for weapons for other countries later. We mean Georgia, Moldova, the Baltic States, Poland and Central Asia.

The sooner this happens as we ask, the sooner there will be peace in Eastern Europe. This is in our best interest. This is in your best interest. This is in the interests of all democracies. Because democracies must be able to defend themselves. Freedom must be armed. Life must overcome death.

And I emphasize this: no advances to such a Russian state! Never again. Any steps towards it or towards any other violator of international law should take place only after their steps towards peace, towards universally recognized rules. And on the basis of a system of preventive deterrence.

I am grateful to you for the unprecedented unity. For your resolute support for peace for our country, for our people. I am grateful to those of you who are trying one hundred percent to stop this war.

I believe we can do it. We will be able to make your Group of Seven not just the Great Seven, but the Great Seven of Peacekeepers.

What do we need for this? Ukraine is very specific in answering this question.

First - to intensify sanctions against Russian aggression on a weekly basis until it stops and restores peace for us.

Second - to take part in the creation of a new system of security guarantees for Ukraine, for our region. Real guarantees. Effective. Those that can stop any aggressor in 24 hours.

We offered to create an association - U-24. This is what the world really needs. Not just to preventively stop the war or hostilities that have already begun. But also to provide assistance to the states that were affected by the natural disaster, that need to be supported during a pandemic, that are facing migration or food crises.

The world needs new effective alliances! New effective guarantees! This can support developing democracies. This can support the economies of countries where there are no stable institutions yet.

And third - which directly concerns our state and Eastern Europe. We must rebuild our state together as soon as possible after the war. Rebuild cities. Restore economic life. Bring people back.

I offer you to participate in such a project. Recovery project. I am sure it will be in our common interest.

But first - weapons for Ukraine. First - increase sanctions against Russia every week. That is, peace comes first. We have the strength to do it. You have the strength to do it. So, may there be peace!

I am grateful to everyone who supports us.

Now the blue and yellow flag in the world is probably the most popular. These colors are associated with freedom. This is true for different people on different continents. And of course in Europe.

The blue and yellow colors of the national flag are not just about Ukraine. This is about you as well, about Sweden. And obviously this is not a coincidence. This is fate. Because we are equally for freedom. We are equally for a peaceful life. We are equally for respect for everyone. We are equally for justice and equally for caring for the natural world in which we live. Therefore, it is logical that Sweden is now among those who support Ukraine the most.

And I am sincerely grateful to each of you for this.

Today is exactly the month of the worst ordeal - the full-scale war waged by Russia against our state.

Europe has never known such a dark month since World War II. It has not seen such destruction and such war crimes. The list of those killed already reaches thousands. Dozens of our cities and communities were destroyed. Russian troops do not distinguish between civilian and military targets. They destroy everything. They burn residential neighborhoods and houses. They blow up hospitals. They even fire at kindergartens with rocket artillery! Hundreds of educational facilities and more than 200 schools were destroyed. Russian troops bombed universities.

Imagine - they destroy any infrastructure that simply serves life. Warehouses with food and medicine. They seized two nuclear power plants. Yesterday they hit the second chemical production already. Phosphorus bombs were used today! Both adults and children were killed.

What is the purpose of such actions of Russia? What is the reason of such terror against us?

This is an attempt to conquer the whole nation. An attempt to make the neighboring state a slave.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Swedish people!

Modern Europe, which has finally become peaceful, is built on clear principles. Namely: there can be no forced border revision. And every nation has the right to choose its own future - without dictatorship, without coercion, without occupation. Thanks to these two principles, we in Europe have had an unprecedented era of cooperation. Peace. Confidence.

We had it until the Russian leadership decided that it could travel in time. That it allegedly could cancel the 21st century. Allegedly could act as in the old days of totalitarian ideologies.

If Ukraine failed to endure, defend itself, it would mean that everything we, living and modern people, value was lost. Everything you value. Everything that is valued by any free people of any state. This would mean that all of Russia's neighbors are in danger. This would mean that you are in danger, because only the sea separates you from this aggressive policy of this state.

And Russian propagandists are already discussing on state television how Russia is occupying your Gotland island in particular. And how to keep it under control for decades. They show it to the Russians on the map, show the directions of the offensive... You may ask for what purpose? They say it will be beneficial for Russia to deploy air defense systems and a military base in Gotland. To cover the capture of the Baltic states.

Russia went to war against Ukraine because it expects to go further to Europe. Expects to destroy freedom further in Europe. This is a fundamental challenge for the European security system.

Please take a look at what the Russian military has already done in our country. 8 years of war in the east. Occupation of Crimea. This is repression. Torture of people, suppression of all manifestations of freedom and diversity.

A month of full-scale war. Total cruelty. The bombing of peaceful cities is as terrible as it was in Syria. Abduction of children. Forced transportation of children and adults to Russia. Rape in the occupied areas. Large-scale looting by the Russian military. Now tens of thousands of houses and tens of thousands of apartments have been destroyed. And there are already almost ten million migrants, three and a half million of them in the European Union.

I deliberately do not want to call these Ukrainians refugees. Because I know that they will return to Ukraine. As soon as Russia leaves our land, as soon as peace is established.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Swedish people!

Sweden was one of the first to come to our aid. I am grateful to you! Your support is absolutely sincere. It is based on values. On our love for freedom. On what our blue-yellow national colors symbolize.

The whole world knows what Sweden wants. The whole world has seen in a month of this shameful war what Ukraine wants. We are together in our anti-war coalition. And we must do everything to make Russia seek peace.

Sweden has made a historic decision to provide Ukraine with the necessary weapons. We thank you for that! For your prudence. For your foresight.

Sweden supports the sanctions policy. A policy without which there will be no peace. Because the Russian leadership will not understand any language other than effective sanctions.

But for peace to come faster, sanctions packages against Russia must be applied on a weekly basis. Not a single barrel of Russian oil! No Russian ships at your ports! Not a single euro of taxes of your companies in Russia! Their military machine must be left without means of subsistence.

Deliberate actions of Russian troops to destroy civilians in Ukraine, to destroy our peaceful cities must receive an inevitable and principled response from all European countries. From the free world.

This has already become the typical feature of Russian troops... Syria, Ukraine... Massacres. Cities destroyed to the ground. Phosphorus and other prohibited munitions. To prevent this from becoming a victorious strategy, all war crimes must be punished. Those who gave the order to kill and those who killed must face the Tribunal. So that no other country in the world thinks that it can kill people with impunity just like that, that it can destroy neighboring countries.

I am confident that together we will be able to ensure peace, and that is why we must now think about rebuilding Ukraine after this war. And it will happen!

I invite Swedish architects, Swedish companies, the Swedish state, your people to take part in this historic project.

Ukraine was beautiful. But now it will be great, because this is our nation. Great Ukraine. Great recovery project. For the sake of the people. For the development of our country and the whole of Europe.

I invite you to show to the world, to all present and future generations that war does not bring the result. And peace does. And it gives life.

Sweden is the first country we offer this project to. You can take patronage over any city, region or industry to restore them. I am confident that your leadership will be indispensable. Your technology, business and your love of life. Your ability to organize space in people's best interest.

Ukraine - all our heroic defenders, all our citizens - has already done a lot to protect our common European values, our common European home.

We are fighting not only for Ukraine, but also for the security of the European Union! And we have proved that we deserve to be a full member of the European Union. The decision is already being elaborated. It's time to adopt it!

I believe that you will support us in this as well.

Thank you, thank you Sweden!

Glory to Ukraine!

I am addressing you from Kyiv, our capital, which has been fighting for a month already, just as our entire state.

Yes, it is true - we are not in the Alliance. Not in the most powerful defense union in the world. Not one of the 30 states under the umbrella of joint protection. Under the umbrella of Article 5. It feels like we are in the "gray zone". Between the West and Russia. But we defend all our common values. And we are bright people! And we have been defending all these values for a month now!

A month of heroic resistance. A month of the darkest suffering.

A month of unpunished destruction of the peaceful state, and with it - the whole architecture of global security. All this is before the eyes of the whole world.

Over the decades, Russia has accumulated considerable resources, military resources, manpower and equipment, air bombs, missiles.

They invested crazy money in death while the world invested in life. But Ukraine is holding on bravely! At the cost of thousands of lives. At the cost of destroyed cities. At the cost of almost ten million migrants. Three and a half of them are already in your territories, in the territories of NATO countries. I am grateful for the support of these people. And people, unfortunately, continue to leave their homes. They are fleeing the terror that the occupiers brought with them.

The very first hours of the invasion meant brutal missile strikes for us. During the month of the war, Russia fired more than a thousand different missiles at our cities. Made hundreds of air raids.

On February 24, I addressed you with a perfectly clear, logical request to help close our skies. In any format. Protect our people from Russian bombs and missiles. We did not hear a clear answer. Ukraine does not have powerful anti-missile weapons, and has a much smaller aircraft fleet than Russia. Therefore, their advantage in the sky is like the use of weapons of mass destruction.

And you see the consequences today - how many people were killed, how many peaceful cities were destroyed.

The Ukrainian army has been resisting for a month in unequal conditions! And I have been repeating the same thing for a month now. To save people and our cities, Ukraine needs military assistance - without restrictions. As Russia uses without restrictions its entire arsenal against us. Destroys all living things. Any objects - from houses to churches, from food warehouses to universities, from bridges to hospitals.

Ukraine asked for your planes. So that we do not lose so many people. And you have thousands of fighter jets! But we haven't been given any yet.

We asked for tanks. So that we can unblock our cities that are now dying - Mariupol, Berdyansk, Melitopol, others. Cities where Russia is keeping hundreds of thousands of people hostage and artificially creating famine - no water, no food, nothing there.

You have at least 20,000 tanks! Ukraine asked for a percent, one percent of all your tanks to be given or sold to us! But we do not have a clear answer yet... The worst thing during the war is not having clear answers to requests for help.

Ukraine never wanted this war. And does not want to fight for years. We just want to save our people. We want to survive! Just survive! Like any nation, we have the right to it. The right to life. The right to this one percent.

And I do not blame NATO - I want to be clear. You are not guilty. It's not your missiles, it's not your bombs that are destroying our cities. This morning, by the way, there were phosphorus bombs. Phosphorus Russian bombs. Adults were killed again and children were killed again. I just want you to know that the Alliance can still prevent the deaths of Ukrainians from Russian strikes, from Russian occupation, by providing us with all the weapons we need.

Yes, we are not in the Alliance. And I do not make these claims. But Ukrainians never thought that the Alliance and the Allies were different.

That in matters of life and death you can be a force separately, but together - no. That NATO may be afraid of Russia's actions. I am sure you already understand that Russia does not intend to stop in Ukraine. Does not intend and will not. It wants to go further.

Against the eastern members of NATO. The Baltic states, Poland - that's for sure. Will NATO then stop thinking about it, worrying about how Russia will react? Who can be sure of that? And do you have confidence that Article 5 can work?

"Budapest" hasn’t worked for us already. Our Budapest Memorandum. Has not worked for peace in Ukraine.

And I will tell you honestly - today Budapest is not working for peace in Ukraine as well. Yes, we receive help from individual members of the Alliance. I am very grateful. Ukrainians are sincerely grateful for this. To each of you who gives what you have, supporting us.

But what about the Alliance? The question of Article 5 is fundamental. I just want you to know what we think about it. And I sincerely wish you that we are wrong in our assessments and in our doubts. I sincerely wish that you actually have a very strong Alliance. Because if we are wrong, the world is safe. But if we are at least one percent right, I ask you to reconsider your attitude. Your own estimates. And really take care of security, security in Europe and, consequently, in the world.

You can give us one percent of all your aircraft. One percent of all your tanks. One percent! We can't just buy it. Such a supply directly depends only on NATO's decisions, on political decisions, by the way.

MLRS systems. Anti-ship weapons. Means of air defense. Is it possible to survive such a war without it?

So when it's finally available, it will give us and you as well, one hundred percent security. And we need one. And the only thing I demand from you… After such a month of war. This is a request for the sake of our military. After such a war against Russia ... Never, please, never tell us again that our army does not meet NATO standards.

We have shown what our standards are capable of. And how much we can give to the common security in Europe and the world. How much we can do to protect against aggression against everything we value, everything you value. But NATO has yet to show what the Alliance can do to save people. To show that this is truly the most powerful defense union in the world. And the world is waiting. And Ukraine is very much waiting. Waiting for real actions. Real security guarantees. From those whose word is trustworthy. And whose actions can keep the peace.

Truly. All offers are on the table. Our needs are on the table. We need peace immediately. The answers are up to you.

I am thankful to those who help us! Thank you!

The meeting of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine has just ended. Traditionally, its results are important decisions for the country and heart attacks for those who have acted against it and the Ukrainian people for years.

On the eve of the Day of Science, not only our leading scientists, but also representatives of the so-called non-classical sciences were awarded in Ukraine. First of all, these are people who are professors in violating the Criminal Code - the so-called thieves in law and crime bosses.

Following the adoption of the law on thieves in law, the strategy for combating organized crime and nine months of work, personal sanctions have been applied against 557 thieves in law currently known in the world. Most of them are not in Ukraine. And the number of those at liberty in Ukraine has halved: from 34 to 17 people. Today we did everything to make this figure zero. In the near future and forever.

All of these persons are subject to: blocking of assets, ban on entry into the territory of Ukraine, refusal to grant a visa, abolition of visa, temporary or permanent residence permit, immigration permit, refusal to extend the period of stay in Ukraine, inability to acquire Ukrainian citizenship and forced expulsion. In a word: those who are not in Ukraine have nothing to come here for. Those who are in Ukraine have nothing to stay here for.

The same applies to another part of this world - the leaders of criminal groups, the so-called crime bosses. We are a hospitable country, but not for 111 foreigners - these are crime bosses to which the same package of sanctions has been applied today. We do not say goodbye to you, we say farewell.

Also today we considered urgent measures for further biological security of Ukraine, protection of Ukraine in cyberspace and creation of cyber troops of Ukraine.

In addition, today we touched upon an important issue - the state lands and houses in Koncha-Zaspa and Pushcha-Vodytsya, as well as the persons who use them. In total, we are talking about almost 400 hectares of preserved area and more than 100 government buildings and cottages.

At the end of 2014, under the former President and in accordance with a government decree, the list of categories of persons entitled to preferential residence was abolished. Which, at first glance, looks good, but in fact legalized the stay of a number of obscure people on these lands and in these residences for a symbolic fee. These include former judges, prosecutors, law enforcement officers, customs officers, tax collectors, people with surnames like Piskun, Landik, Vasiunyk, Yanukovych-era ministers Tabachnyk and Bohatyriova, Poroshenko-era deputy prime minister Zubko, and even director of the “Bohdan” corporation department Oleksandr Ilyin.

These and a number of other people received contracts for the use of the buildings, made repairs there, received reimbursement for the cost of repairs in the amount of 50 percent and could live there for a symbolic fee. Today I have set a task to conduct a full audit of the lands and residences of Koncha-Zaspa and Pushcha-Vodytsya to make a complete list of persons living there and find out under what conditions they obtained this right. That is, all the necessary information, after which we will begin the great migration of these people.

Finally, fellow Ukrainians, I want to summarize today's meeting and all the high profile events of this week in just a few words.

Congratulations to all! Spring has come

Today, on May 9, Ukraine celebrates the Day of Victory over Nazism. To understand and comprehend the significance of this victory, it is enough to have a walk in Kyiv on Sunday. Families with children walk along the embankment, newlyweds are photographed near Kyi, Shchek, Khoryv and Lybid, a grandfather teaches his granddaughter to ride a bicycle in the park, people enjoy desserts on the terrace of the cafe, and a street violinist brilliantly performs "Melody" by Myroslav Skoryk nearby.

All this is happening under the blue and yellow flags, in independent Ukraine. And in it, May 2021 looks significantly different than May 1943, when Kyiv was occupied by the Nazis. Everything I said was impossible there. And behind me there are the faces of the people who made it possible. Of course, there are many more. And almost every Ukrainian family has such a photo in the family album. Where a father, grandfather or great-grandfather is depicted.

And where a mother, grandmother or great-grandmother is depicted. And there is no such museum in the world where there would be enough space for all the photos of Ukrainians who fought and defeated Nazism in the Anti-Hitler Coalition. This is at least seven million Ukrainians, without whom victory would be impossible.

What is victory over Nazism for us? It is gratitude. Which has no boundaries, statutes of limitations or geographical division. Gratitude to our ancestors for expelling the Nazis from Kharkiv and Donetsk in 1943. For the expulsion of the Nazis from Odesa and Crimea in 1944. For the expulsion of the invaders from Kyiv and Lviv, Rivne and Poltava, Ternopil and Kryvyi Rih. Gratitude from Luhansk and Zakarpattia, Volyn and Podillia, Kherson and Ivano-Frankivsk regions. Gratitude from every corner of Ukraine for expelling the Nazis from every corner of Ukraine.

What is victory over Nazism for us? This is memory. About its horrible price. About the fact that more than eight million Ukrainians died in World War II. That every fifth Ukrainian did not return home. In total, the war claimed at least 50 million lives. And because of these horrible numbers, the word "victory" should be taken without euphoria and dizziness. And the desire to repeat the victory may relate to the hockey or football championship, not to the war and the deaths of each of the 2194 days of World War II.

Modesty glorifies winners even more. Everyone who was lucky enough to talk to World War II veterans knows how they always talked about the war. Modestly, without strain, boasting, vanity, pathos and without a drop of romanticism. Because romance in war happens only in movies. And in real life, in the piles of corpses, torn limbs, in concentration camps, bombings, blockades, trains with ostarbeiters and gas chambers, there is no romance. They saw it, endured, overcame it, and every year on May 9 they said one, unchanging toast: "Let there never be a war".

And for us, the victory over Nazism is a treasure gained through suffering, not another reason to go for barbecues. These are not stickers on cars, but flowers on the grave of ancestors. This is not a carnival, not a costume party, and certainly not a photo shoot of politicians in the uniform of an army to which they had nothing to do, with a machine gun that they do not know how to hold in their hands.

What is victory over Nazism for us? This is involvement in a great cause for humanity. After all, this war was not about whose army would win. And about whose philosophy would win. And it is important not only that we have won, but also that Nazism has lost. Lost forever. With a prescription: to disappear from this world together with xenophobia, racism and inequality.

And the victory over Nazism for us is pride for Ukrainians, pride for our ancestors who were an integral part of the victory.

A common victory, where all countries and peoples who fought Nazism were important, without the prefix "more" or "less". And we will not allow anyone to minimize the contribution to the victory of Ukrainians who not only defended their land, but also as part of the Soviet army and allied forces of the Anti-Hitler coalition along with dozens of other nations did not allow the Nazis to rule in Vienna, Paris, Prague, Warsaw, Madrid, Budapest, Amsterdam, Brussels, Rome, Berlin and many other cities around the world.

We will not forget and will never tire of remembering and reminding others every year that on April 30, 1945, the Flag of Victory over the Reichstag was hoisted by Ukrainian Oleksiy Berest. That Michael Strank, a native of the Ukrainian Lemko family, hoisted the US flag on Iwo Jima. That on September 2, 1945, the instrument of unconditional surrender of Japan was signed aboard the USS Missouri by a Ukrainian, Lieutenant General Kuzma Derevyanko.

That the best pilot of the Second World War is Ivan Kozhedub, Ukrainian who shot down more than 60 enemy planes. That sniper Liudmyla Pavlychenko killed 309 Nazi soldiers and officers. That the Ukrainian crew of the Ukrainian tank was the first to break the gate of the Auschwitz concentration camp.

That Ukrainian spy Yevhen Bereznyak, the prototype of the famous film hero Major Whirlwind, is called the savior of Krakow, Poland. And let's not forget hundreds of thousands of names of Ukrainians who are inscribed in the history of World War II and the victory over Nazism.

And all this today increases the pain and sadness, if we imagine the reaction of these people to the fact that their descendants, modern Ukrainians, years later learn again what war is. It was our duty to preserve the memory of the Second World War. That is why, from generation to generation, parents told their sons about the war. But it turned upside down, and since 2014 sons have been telling their parents about the war. And not grandparents can tell grandchildren, but grandchildren can tell grandparents about things like bombing or captivity. And in the history of the city of Mariupol, next to the date of September 10, 1944, the date of June 13, 2014 appeared. And this city, along with many other Ukrainian cities in the east, 76 years after World War II, will celebrate two liberation dates.

All this is painful and unfair in relation to everything that our ancestors went through defending the Ukrainian land. But their feats and heroism give strength to the new generation of Ukrainian soldiers, our defenders.

And they give hope that the day will surely come when it will be possible to walk on Sunday in Donetsk, Luhansk or Yalta and see how families with children walk along the embankment, newlyweds are photographed, a grandfather teaches his granddaughter to ride a bicycle in the park and a street violinist performs Myroslav Skoryk's "Melody" nearby. And all this is happening under the blue and yellow flag, in independent Ukraine.

With faith in this, with hope for peace, we thank and bow today to all Ukrainians who defended and liberated our land from the Nazis in World War II.

We live in a world where there are more than seven thousand different languages. But there is a special one that unites many nations of the world every year on May 8, the Day of Remembrance and Reconciliation. When we cry in one language. When we are silent in one language. It is a language of boundless honor and respect for the memory of the millions of people who died in World War II.

Today we bow to all those who defended the native Ukrainian land from Nazism, defended the world, to all those who died during the Second World War. Veterans who opposed Nazis, underground fighters, prisoners of war, Ostarbeiters, concentration camp prisoners, children of war, civilians and everyone who suffered from the Nazi occupation.

In 1945, on the night of May 8-9, the planet met the first minute of peace. Mankind waited six years for one minute. Or almost 3 million 160 thousand minutes of World War II.

When in each of these minutes dozens of people were killed on the planet.

At least 20 people were killed every minute.

And that's why this moment was so important. It was the fall of a regime that stood in the way of humanity to further physical existence as such. It was the capitulation of a regime that blocked humanity's path to a world free of anti-Semitism, xenophobia, racism and intolerance.

Our ancestors paid more than eight million for a ticket to this world. More than eight million lives. More than eight million Ukrainians died. More than the population of Kyiv, Odesa, Kharkiv, Lviv and Dnipro combined.

Six years of war. 2194 days of the war. Explosions, shots, trenches, wounds, famine, bombing, blockades, mass shootings, punitive operations, occupation, concentration camps, gas chambers, yellow stars, ghettos, Babyn Yar, captivity, forced labor. They died for us to know what these concepts mean from books, not from our own experience. See it in the movies, not with our own eyes. They died for a ticket to the future for us, for their children and grandchildren. And today, children and grandchildren need to know that. Remember that. Appreciate that. Be thankful for that. Today. Tomorrow. And all their life.

That is why every year we recall the worst catastrophe in human history. Every year we talk about its terrible consequences. Every year, together with the whole civilized world, we say: never again.

If we imagine the impossible for a moment and assume that humanity has been given the opportunity to change its history once, to get rid of one period, I am sure that all people on Earth would choose the only option: to avoid and prevent World War II.

Unfortunately, we can't do that. We cannot avoid war in the past. But we can and must do everything we can to prevent a new war in the future.

Today, the whole world and all world leaders must show that humanity has learned the lesson of 1939-1945 forever. That it is aware of the consequences of war and will never allow this to happen again.

Isn't it time to put an end to this issue? Isn't it time to prove the devotion to the slogan “Never again” in practical terms?

Isn't it time for humanity to change its wording and say not "World War II" but "The Second and LAST World War"? To give no chance and probability of a new war, even on a verbal level. To fill millions of school textbooks on history, research works, millions of novels and films with the mantra of the impossibility of repeating the war in the future. The world must say: "In 1939-1945, the LAST World War took place".

Fellow Ukrainians!

Today, our courageous men and women defend the Ukrainian state, our sovereignty and territorial integrity. For the sake of peace and prosperity of independent Ukraine. For the sake of future generations.

For the same reason that 76 years ago our grandparents from every corner of Ukraine defended their native land, fought Nazism and won. Today, as last year, I am in the Luhansk region, in the Milove district, near the village of Pivnivka, where in December of 1942 the expulsion of Hitler's invaders from the Ukrainian land began. The Bell of Remembrance appeared in this place today.

Each of its strikes means that we will never forget what our ancestors did so that the next generations of Ukrainians could live freely on their land, in their state in peace and harmony. May the memory of all those died during the Second and, I believe, the last World War live forever.

What do we hear today? It's not just rocket explosions, battles, the roar of aircraft. It is the sound of a new Iron Curtain lowering and closing Russia away from the civilized world. Our national task is to make this curtain pass not through our Ukrainian territory, but at the home of Russians.

The Ukrainian army, our border guards, police and special services stopped the enemy's attacks. In the language of conflict, this can be called an operational pause.

In Donbas, our Armed Forces are doing great, the Kharkiv direction is very difficult, the forces for the defense of the city are working, they are reliable, they are our men. The most problematic situation today is in the south. Our troops are fighting fierce battles in the suburbs of Kherson. The enemy is pushing out of the occupied Crimea, trying to advance towards Melitopol.

In the north of the country, the enemy is slowly advancing in the Chernihiv region, but there are forces to hold it. Reliable defense is built in the Zhytomyr region. Enemy paratroopers in Hostomel are blocked, troops are ordered to destroy them.

Yes, we, unfortunately, have losses, losses of our heroes. Yes, we have captured Russian soldiers. Our doctors are helping some of them - those who have surrendered. Many Russian aircraft and many armored vehicles were destroyed.

Yes, we see that many Russians are shocked by what is happening. Some Russians are already calling on social media that they are against the war. We see it. But the leadership of the Russian Federation is unlikely to see it.

So please.

If you hear us, if you understand us, if you understand that you are attacking an independent country, please go out to the squares and address the President of your country.

We are Ukrainians. We are on our land. You are Russians. Now your military has started a war. The war in our state. I would very much like you to speak on Red Square or somewhere else on the streets of your capital, in Moscow, St. Petersburg and other cities in Russia. Not only in Instagram - it is very important.

What do we see at this hour? For the world community, Russia is becoming an analogue of the so-called DPR - this is complete isolation.

I am in constant contact with the leaders of partner countries and international organizations. Russia has already begun receiving the first sanctions from a large package of sanctions, the most powerful in world history.

No one will be able to convince or force us, Ukrainians, to give up our freedom, our independence, our sovereignty. But it seems that the Russian leadership is trying to do this by destroying the potential of their country. Everything that Russia has done since 2000 can now be burned live in front of the world.

We emphasize that Ukraine did not choose the path of war. But Ukraine offers to return to peace.

What can Ukrainians do? Help the national defense. Join the ranks of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and territorial defense units. Any citizen with combat experience will now be useful. It is up to you and all of us whether the enemy will be able to advance further into the territory of our independent state. Please help the volunteer community and the medical system, for example by donating blood.

Politicians and community leaders - help people, ensure normal life on the ground as much as possible. Everyone should take care of their loved ones and take care of those neighbors or acquaintances who need it. The duty of journalists, an important duty, is to defend democracy and freedom in Ukraine.

I spoke today with many leaders - the United Kingdom, Turkey, France, Germany, the EU, the United States, Sweden, Romania, Poland, Austria and others.

If you, dear European leaders, dear world leaders, leaders of the free world, do not help us today, then tomorrow the war will knock on your door.

Ukraine wants peace. Europe wants peace. The world says it doesn't want to fight, and Russia says it doesn't want to attack. Someone is lying. This is not an axiom, but it is no longer a hypothesis.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Two days ago I was in Donbas, on the delimitation line. Legally - between Ukraine and the temporarily occupied territories. In fact, the delimitation line between peace and war. Where on the one side there is a kindergarten, and on the other side there is a projectile that hit it. On the one side there is a school, on the other side there is a projectile hitting the school yard.

And next to it there are 30 children who go… no, not to NATO, but to school. Someone has physics classes. Knowing its basic laws, even children understand how absurd the statements that the shelling is carried out by Ukraine sound.

Someone has math classes. Children can calculate the difference between the number of shelling occasions in these three days and the occasions of mentioning Ukraine in this year's Munich Security Report without a calculator.

And someone has history classes. And when a bomb crater appears in the school yard, children have a question: has the world forgotten its mistakes of the XX century?

What do attempts at appeasement lead to? As the question "Why die for Danzig?" turned into the need to die for Dunkirk and dozens of other cities in Europe and the world. At the cost of tens of millions of lives.

These are terrible lessons of history. I just want to make sure you and I read the same books. Hence, we have the same understanding of the answer to the main question: how did it happen that in the XXI century, Europe is at war again and people are dying? Why does it last longer than World War II? How did we get to the biggest security crisis since the Cold War? For me, as the President of a country that has lost part of the territory, thousands of people and on whose borders there are now 150,000 Russian troops, equipment and heavy weapons, the answer is obvious.

The architecture of world security is fragile and needs to be updated. The rules that the world agreed on decades ago no longer work. They do not keep up with new threats. They are not effective for overcoming them. This is a cough syrup when you need a coronavirus vaccine. The security system is slow. It crashes again. Because of different things: selfishness, self-confidence, irresponsibility of states at the global level. As a result, we have crimes of some and indifference of others. Indifference that makes you an accomplice. It is symbolic that I am talking about this right here. It was here 15 years ago that Russia announced its intention to challenge global security. What did the world say? Appeasement. Result? At least - the annexation of Crimea and aggression against my state.

The UN, which is supposed to defend peace and world security, cannot defend itself. When its Charter is violated. When one of the members of the UN Security Council annexes the territory of one of the founding members of the UN. And the UN itself ignores the Crimea Platform, the goal of which is to de-occupy Crimea peacefully and protect the rights of Crimeans.

Three years ago, it was here that Angela Merkel said: “Who will pick up the wreckage of the world order? Only all of us, together." The audience gave a standing ovation. But, unfortunately, the collective applause did not grow into collective action. And now, when the world is talking about the threat of a great war, the question arises: is there anything left to pick up? The security architecture in Europe and the world is almost destroyed. It's too late to think about repairs, it's time to build a new system. Mankind has done this twice, paying too high a price - two world wars. We have a chance to break this trend until it becomes a consistent pattern. And start building a new system before millions of victims. Having the old lessons of the First and Second World Wars, not our own experience of the possible third, God forbid.

I talked about it here. And on the rostrum of the UN. That in the XXI century there are no more foreign wars. That the annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas affects the whole world. And this is not a war in Ukraine, but a war in Europe. I said this at summits and forums. In 2019, 2020, 2021. Will the world be able to hear me in 2022?

This is no longer a hypothesis, but not an axiom yet. Why? Evidence is needed. More important than words on Twitter or statements in the media. Action is required. It is the world that needs it, not just us.

We will defend our land with or without the support of partners. Whether they give us hundreds of modern weapons or five thousand helmets. We appreciate any help, but everyone should understand that these are not charitable contributions that Ukraine should ask for or remind of.

These are not noble gestures for which Ukraine should bow low. This is your contribution to the security of Europe and the world. Where Ukraine has been a reliable shield for eight years. And for eight years it has been rebuffing one of the world's biggest armies. Which stands along our borders, not the borders of the EU.

And Grad rockets hit Mariupol, not European cities. And after almost six months of fighting, the airport in Donetsk was destroyed, not in Frankfurt. And it's always hot in the Avdiivka industrial zone - it was hot there in the last days, not in Montmartre. And no European country knows what military burials every day in all regions are. And no European leader knows what regular meetings with the families of the deceased are.

Be that as it may, we will defend our beautiful land no matter if we have 50,000, 150 or one million soldiers of any army on the border. To really help Ukraine, it is not necessary to say how many servicemen and military equipment are on the border. Say what numbers we have.

To really help Ukraine, it is not necessary to constantly talk only about the dates of the probable invasion. We will defend our land on February 16, March 1 and December 31. We need other dates much more. And everyone understands perfectly well which ones.

Tomorrow in Ukraine is the Day of the Heroes of the Heavenly Hundred. Eight years ago, Ukrainians made their choice, and many gave their lives for that choice. Eight years later, should Ukraine constantly call for recognition of the European perspective? Since 2014, Russia has been convincing that we have chosen the wrong path, that no one is waiting for us in Europe. Shouldn't Europe constantly say and prove by action that this is not true? Shouldn't the EU say today that its citizens are positive about Ukraine's accession to the Union? Why do we avoid this question? Doesn't Ukraine deserve direct and honest answers?

This also applies to NATO. We are told: the door is open. But so far authorized access only. If not all members of the Alliance want to see us or all members of the Alliance do not want to see us, be honest. Open doors are good, but we need open answers, not open questions for years. Isn't the right to the truth one of our enhanced opportunities? The best time for it is the next summit in Madrid.

Russia says Ukraine seeks to join the Alliance to return Crimea by force. It is gratifying that the words "return Crimea" appear in their rhetoric. But they inattentively read Article 5 of the NATO Charter: collective action is for protection, not offensive. Crimea and the occupied regions of Donbas will certainly return to Ukraine, but only peacefully.

Ukraine consistently implements the Normandy agreements and the Minsk agreements. Their foundation is the unquestionable recognition of the territorial integrity and independence of our state. We seek a diplomatic settlement of the armed conflict. Note: solely on the basis of international law.

So what is really going on in the peace process? Two years ago, we agreed with the Presidents of France, the Russian Federation, the Chancellor of Germany on a full-scale ceasefire. And Ukraine is scrupulously adhering to these agreements. We are as restrained as possible against the background of constant provocations. We are constantly making proposals in the framework of the Normandy Four and the Trilateral Contact Group. And what do we see? Shells and bullets from the other side. Our soldiers and civilians are being killed and wounded, and civilian infrastructure is being destroyed.

The last days have become especially illustrative. Hundreds of massive shelling occasions with weapons prohibited by the Minsk agreements. It is also important to stop restricting the admission of OSCE observers to Ukraine's TOT. They are threatened. They are intimidated. All humanitarian issues are blocked.

Two years ago, I signed a law on the unconditional admission of representatives of humanitarian organizations to detainees. But they are simply not admitted to the temporarily occupied territories. After two exchanges of captives, the process was blocked, although Ukraine provided agreed lists. Inhuman torture at the infamous Isolation Prison in Donetsk has become a symbol of human rights abuses.

The two new checkpoints we opened in November 2020 in the Luhansk region still do not function - and here we see outright obstruction under contrived pretexts.

Ukraine is doing everything possible to reach progress in discussions and political issues. In the TCG, in the Minsk process, we’ve put forward proposals - draft laws, but everything is blocked - no one talks about them. Ukraine demands to unblock the negotiation process immediately. But this does not mean that the search for peace is limited to it alone.

We are ready to look for the key to the end of the war in all possible formats and platforms: Paris, Berlin, Minsk. Istanbul, Geneva, Brussels, New York, Beijing - I don't care where in the world to negotiate peace in Ukraine.

It does not matter if four countries, seven or a hundred participate, the main thing is that Ukraine and Russia are among them. What is really important is the understanding that peace is needed not only by us, the world needs peace in Ukraine. Peace and restoration of territorial integrity within internationally recognized borders. This is the only way. And I hope no one thinks of Ukraine as a convenient and eternal buffer zone between the West and Russia. This will never happen. Nobody will allow that.

Otherwise - who's next? Will NATO countries have to defend each other? I want to believe that the North Atlantic Treaty and Article 5 will be more effective than the Budapest Memorandum.

Ukraine has received security guarantees for abandoning the world's third nuclear capability. We don't have that weapon. We also have no security. We also do not have part of the territory of our state that is larger in area than Switzerland, the Netherlands or Belgium. And most importantly - we don’t have millions of our citizens. We don’t have all this.

Therefore, we have something. The right to demand a shift from a policy of appeasement to ensuring security and peace guarantees.

Since 2014, Ukraine has tried three times to convene consultations with the guarantor states of the Budapest Memorandum. Three times without success. Today Ukraine will do it for the fourth time. I, as President, will do this for the first time. But both Ukraine and I are doing this for the last time. I am initiating consultations in the framework of the Budapest Memorandum. The Minister of Foreign Affairs was commissioned to convene them. If they do not happen again or their results do not guarantee security for our country, Ukraine will have every right to believe that the Budapest Memorandum is not working and all the package decisions of 1994 are in doubt.

I also propose to convene a summit of permanent members of the UN Security Council in the coming weeks with the participation of Ukraine, Germany and Turkey in order to address security challenges in Europe. And elaborate new, effective security guarantees for Ukraine. Guarantees today, as long as we are not a member of the Alliance and in fact are in the gray zone - in a security vacuum.

What else can we do now? Continue to effectively support Ukraine and its defense capabilities. Provide Ukraine with a clear European perspective, the tools of support available to candidate countries, and clear and comprehensive timeframes for joining the Alliance.

Support the transformation in our country. Establish a Stability and Reconstruction Fund for Ukraine, a land-lease program, the supply of the latest weapons, machinery and equipment for our army - an army that protects the whole of Europe.

Develop an effective package of preventive sanctions to deter aggression. Guarantee Ukraine's energy security, ensure its integration into the EU energy market when Nord Stream 2 is used as a weapon.

All these questions need answers.

So far we have silence instead of them. And as long as there is silence, there will be no silence in the east of our state. That is - in Europe. That is - in the whole world. I hope the whole world finally understands this, Europe understands.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

I thank all the states that supported Ukraine today.

In words, in declarations, in concrete help. Those who are on our side today. On the side of truth and international law. I'm not calling you by name - I don't want some other countries to be ashamed. But this is their business, this is their karma. And this is on their conscience. However, I do not know how they will be able to explain their actions to the two soldiers killed and three wounded in Ukraine today.

And most importantly - to three girls from Kyiv. One is ten years old, the second is six, and the third is only one. Today they were left without a father. At 6 o'clock in the morning Central European Time. When the Ukrainian intelligence officer, Captain Anton Sydorov was killed as a result of artillery fire prohibited by the Minsk agreements. I don't know what he thought at the last moment of his life. He definitely didn't know what agenda someone needs to meet to end the war.

But he knows exactly the answer to the question I asked at the beginning. He knows exactly who of us is lying.

May his memory live forever. May the memory of all those who died today and during the war in the east of our state live forever.

I am addressing you at this tense moment.

Our state is facing serious external and internal challenges that require responsibility, confidence and concrete actions from me and each of us.

We are being intimidated by the great war and the date of the military invasion is being set again. This is not the first time.

The war against us is being systematically waged on all fronts. On the military one, they increase the contingent around the border. On the diplomatic one, they are trying to deprive us of the right to determine our own foreign policy course. On the energy one, they limit the supply of gas, electricity and coal. On the information one, they seek to spread panic among citizens and investors through the media.

But our state today is stronger than ever.

This is not the first threat that the strong Ukrainian people have faced. Two years ago, we, like the rest of the world, looked confused in the eyes of the pandemic. However, we united and with clear systemic steps practically defeated it. In this difficult time, the strong Ukrainian people have shown their best qualities - unity and the will to win.

Unlike the pandemic two years ago, today we clearly understand all the challenges we face and what to do about them. We are confident, but not self-confident. We understand all the risks. We are constantly monitoring the situation, working out different scenarios, preparing decent responses to all possible aggressive actions.

We know exactly where the foreign army is near our borders, its numbers, its locations, its equipment and its plans.

We have something to respond with. We have a great army. Our guys have unique combat experience and modern weapons. This is an army many times stronger than eight years ago.

Along with the army, Ukrainian diplomacy is at the forefront of defending our interests. We have managed to gain diplomatic support from almost all leaders of the civilized world. Most of them have either already visited and supported Ukraine, or will do so in the near future. Today, everyone recognizes that the security of Europe and the entire continent depends on Ukraine and its army.

We want peace and we want to resolve all issues exclusively through negotiations. Both Donbas and Crimea will return to Ukraine. Exclusively through diplomacy. We do not encroach on what’s not ours, but we will not give up our land.

We are confident in our Armed Forces, but our military must also feel our support, our cohesion and our unity. The foothold of our army is the confidence of their own people and a strong economy.

We have formed sufficient reserves to repel attacks on the hryvnia exchange rate and our financial system. We will not ignore any industry that will need government support. As it happened the other day with airlines. And evidence of this is a stable hryvnia exchange rate and open skies.

An important front of defense is the objective coverage of the situation by the domestic media. And now I want to address our Ukrainian journalists. Some of you sometimes have to perform the tasks of media owners. Most of them have already fled their own country.

Work for Ukraine, not for those who fled. The fate of the country today depends on your honest position.

And now I want to address not those who stayed with Ukraine and in Ukraine, but those who left it at the most crucial moment. Your strength is not in your money and planes, but in the civic position you can show. Return to your people and the country due to which you got your factories and wealth. Today, everyone passes a real test for a citizen of Ukraine. Pass it with dignity. Let everyone understand for whom Ukraine is really the Homeland, and for whom it is just a platform for money making.

I address separately all representatives of the state: civil servants, people's deputies of all levels who have fled the country or plan to do so. The people of Ukraine have entrusted you not only to govern the state, but also to protect it. It is your direct duty in this situation to be with us, with the Ukrainian people. I urge you to return to your homeland within 24 hours and stand side by side with the Ukrainian army, diplomacy and people!

We are told that February 16 will be the day of the attack. We will make it the Day of Unity. The relevant decree has already been signed. On this day, we will hoist national flags, put on blue and yellow ribbons and show the world our unity.

We have one great European aspiration. We want freedom and are ready to fight for it. 14,000 defenders and civilians killed in this war are watching us from the sky. And we will not betray their memory.

We all want to live happily, and happiness loves the strong ones. We have never known what it is to give up and we are not going to learn that.

Today is not just Valentine's Day. It is the day of those in love with Ukraine. We believe in our own strength and continue to build our future together. Because we are united by love for Ukraine, united and unique. And love will win. Yes, now you may think it's darkness all around. But tomorrow the sun will rise again over our peaceful sky

A year ago, I began my address by saying that its format should be changed. And, in addition to people's deputies, I should report directly to the people who hired all of us for five years, hired me! These are our military and their families, our doctors, scientists, students, artists, athletes. Citizens of Ukraine. From all regions of Ukraine, including our Donbas and Crimea. I am glad to begin this address today by welcoming all of them in this room!

This is especially symbolic today. On a significant day that happened exactly 30 years ago. On December 1, 1991, the All-Ukrainian referendum on Ukraine's independence was held, supported by an absolute majority of Ukrainian citizens. From all regions, including Donbas and Crimea.

We took a big step 30 years ago. But we did not go further.

We restored, proclaimed, chose and gained an independent Ukraine. But we never started building it. Independent of other people's influence and other people's interests.

Where the law is one for all, and the law decides everything. Not one decides everything, and for all this is the law. Where the Constitution is a big social contract, not a small backstage "contract". Where politicians work for 100% of citizens, not for 20% of GDP of one citizen.

Such a country has not been built for many years. We have all been building such a country for the last two and a half years. Really free and independent state.

An independent country is first and foremost a healthy country. We have been opposing COVID-19 for two years. We started with almost nothing. And it's true. Now we have almost everything. Hospitals, beds, oxygen and, most importantly, vaccines. Yesterday we did not know how to distribute the first batch of 500 thousand doses. And now, millions of doses of AstraZeneca, CoronaVac, Pfizer and Moderna are available. We started with ten thousand vaccinations a day. In November, we made 6.5 million. Thanks to our doctors. And in total today we have already carried out 24 million vaccinations.

But I do not want the main word of my address today to be "covid", and I do not want it to be the word "lockdown". I want this to be the main association with our country - I want the phrase "for the first time" to always be next to the word "Ukraine".

I will talk about the main things: what was done for the first time and what will happen next.

Despite the global pandemic and the economic crisis caused by this pandemic, we have stabilized the economic situation. In 2021, the size of Ukraine's economy will reach a record high for the first time since independence - more than $ 190 billion. This is more than in the pre-crisis years of 2008 and 2013.

For the first time since 2013, we will reduce public debt to below 50% of GDP. Despite the fact that in recent years in most countries it has grown rapidly and on average in the world exceeds 90%. Our gold and foreign exchange reserves have grown to $ 30 billion today. This is the highest figure since 2013.

For the first time in the history of independent Ukraine, the loan rate for small and medium-sized businesses fell below 10%. Currently, it is an average of 9.7%.

Thanks to the Affordable Loans 5-7-9 program, Ukrainian small and medium-sized businesses received more than 70 billion hryvnias and created thousands of new jobs.

We will soon launch the Ukrainian Dream program, under which every citizen of our country who pays taxes honestly will be able to get a loan at a rate of 5% in hryvnia to buy real estate in a new house, electric car, get education or change profession.

Energy crisis, restrictions on electricity supply, significant increase in tariffs. For the first time, this is not about Ukraine. This is the reality of the whole world, despite which we have managed to maintain stability in the energy sector, curb rising prices for housing and communal services, and even reduce electricity prices for the population.

In 2022, we will begin the "Large Thermo-Modernization". We plan to insulate thousands of high-rise buildings, schools, kindergartens and hospitals. This will allow us to insure against further increases in energy prices and for the first time to gain true energy independence.

Dear MPs, I would like to thank the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine - yesterday we passed a very important tax law № 5600, which increases the rent: the fee for the use of natural resources. We will direct these funds to our children. Therefore, for the first time in history, I will introduce a bill on the economic passport of a Ukrainian by December 10. According to it, these funds - the fee for the use of our subsoil - will be accumulated on the personal accounts of children of Ukrainian citizens. After reaching the age of majority, our children will be able to use this money to get an education in Ukraine or buy their own housing in Ukraine. Thanks to these two laws, our oligarchs will finally become real investors in the future of our children. Congratulations to them. And this will also be the first time since the independence of our state.

As of today, the minimum wage in Ukraine is 6.5 thousand hryvnias. We have not only raised the minimum wage. For the first time in 30 years, the average wage in dollar terms has exceeded $ 500 a month. For the first time, doctors' salaries have doubled in a year.

From the new year, from January 1, it will be at least 20 thousand hryvnias, and the average salary of a doctor in Ukraine will be 24 thousand hryvnias. For the first time, we begin to treat the doctor properly, and not only when we need it. And I am sure that in my next address I will say the same words about the salaries of our teachers.

But it's not just about raising wages. Compared to 2019, the budget for medicine has doubled. For the first time in the history of independent Ukraine, we have fully equipped the fleet of ambulances, 100%. We repaired 600 rural outpatient clinics and more than 200 ER departments. And next year we will begin the reconstruction of 48 regional multidisciplinary clinical hospitals. 24 for adults, 24 for children. As well as 24 rehabilitation centers for our veterans.

I am proud that next year, for the first time since the beginning of the war in the east, we will completely close the queue for apartments for all our veterans of the war in the east. Immediately after the veterans, we will begin the same process for all our servicemen.

I am proud that the whole world applauds Ukrainian military intelligence for the rescue of almost a thousand people in Afghanistan. Glory to Ukraine!

I am proud that for the first time in 30 years in 2022 the funding of the defense and security sector, all programs, will exceed 320 billion hryvnias. Especially given the fact that in 2018 this amount was 191.7 billion hryvnias.

In the framework of these funds, we are launching for the first time a comprehensive missile program, a program to restore the Ukrainian fleet, and the creation of cyber troops in Ukraine.

For the first time since independence, the state is building Antonov An-178 aircraft for its army. For the first time in Ukraine we are starting to build a military plant for the production of modern drones.

For the first time in many years, the National Security and Defense Council has become truly concerned with the security and defense of the state. A state that is independent of thieves in law, smugglers, criminal bosses, agents of other states. Protecting its land, its subsoil, its drinking water, forests and all its strategic enterprises.

We are building a country independent of the help and support of others.

Which is always grateful for this - I thank every country - but never waits just for this, and above all counts on itself. We are not waiting for tens of months from the seizure of Crimea, but we are gathering dozens of countries for its liberation and launching the Crimea Platform.

Its first summit was attended by 46 delegations, leaders of the G7 and the EU: the United States, Germany, France, Turkey, all our friends, the leadership of NATO, the OSCE and the Council of Europe. For the first time since 2014, the deoccupation of Crimea was discussed at the highest international level. We have returned Crimea to the world agenda. The Crimea Platform will be enshrined in a UN General Assembly resolution. We are waiting for it to receive the official status of the international organization.

For the first time since the occupation, we are fighting for Crimea not on billboards, but on all international platforms and meetings. Not by slogans, but by official documents. For the first time since 2014, the Strategy of deoccupation and reintegration of Crimea has been developed and approved. The area is 27 thousand square kilometers. Larger than some countries in Europe and the world. But we are not fighting for hectares, we’re fighting for people, for our citizens. And for the first time in history, we passed a law on indigenous peoples, which consolidated the status and rights of Crimean Tatars. We are fighting for our youth and have significantly simplified access to higher education in Ukraine for schoolchildren from Crimea and the temporarily occupied Donbas: without external testing, free of charge, without restrictions, without any conditions at any university. We are fighting for the temporarily occupied consciousness of our citizens, so we launched a broadcast for the temporarily occupied territories. This is our land. Our goal is to release it.

No one will do it for us. This is our philosophy.

This year, we have maintained the bipartisan support of the United States and taken our relationship to a new, higher level.

Following my meeting with President Biden, a Joint Statement was adopted. Military support. The Charter of Strategic Partnership between Ukraine and the United States has been updated. At the heart of our relations with the European Union is trust, solidarity and mutual support. This is evidenced by the results of the 23rd EU-Ukraine Summit and its ambitious final statement. Our goal is to implement the Association Agreement. According to government estimates, about 60% of all Ukraine's commitments under the Agreement have been fulfilled, with 25% this year alone. Thank you, dear people’s deputies.

We prove every day that we are able not only to cooperate effectively with NATO in Alliance operations and exercises - cooperation in the Black Sea, the Lithuanian-Polish-Ukrainian Brigade - but also to defend democracy, freedom and our own state with weapons in hands.

For the first time, together with the United Kingdom, we are implementing an ambitious project to develop the Ukrainian Navy worth £ 1.7 billion.

We are already building the first corvette for our Navy with Turkey.

For the first time, four large-scale agreements with France worth € 1.3 billion have been signed for major investment projects.

We have achieved important results in cooperation with our partners: the IMF, the World Bank, the EBRD and other international institutions totaling more than $ 2.7 billion.

For the first time, we have invited EU leaders to create a regional platform to strengthen energy security. The urgency of this initiative is confirmed by the current energy crisis in Europe. We consistently prove that Nord Stream 2 is an energy weapon that poses a threat to the entire region. We are grateful to all partners who support us.

An important component of our international policy is to support Ukrainians in the world. I know how important the issue of multiple citizenship is for Ukrainians living in the United States, Canada, and the EU. Today I am submitting the relevant bill to the Parliament. There are 65 million of us.

For the first time Ukrainians all over the world will feel not like a diaspora or just people of "Ukrainian origin", but like people of Ukrainian citizenship! Equal Ukrainians.

And this is also part of independence, when people with equal rights drive on smooth roads.

In 30 years, Ukrainians have become great drivers, learning to bypass potholes on the roads. For the first time in history, the opposition has criticized the government for building roads and bridges. Special criticism of the "Large Construction" comes from those who at their time in power could not make either medium or small construction. And they drove on the roads with holes, leaving the same holes in the budget.

Everyone thought that good roads and Ukraine are antonyms. We have proved that they have become synonymous. We have already built 13,000 kilometers of roads. But there can’t be too many quality roads, so the goal for the next two years is not reduced - it's 15 thousand kilometers of roads.

Another important area is the national bridge reconstruction program. 560 bridges and overpasses have already been built and renovated within it, including the legendary bridge in Zaporizhzhia, which was unfinished for 15 years. Over the next two years, we plan to connect the shores across our Ukraine with another 810 bridges and overpasses, including the Kremenchuh and Yampil bridges.

Independence must be felt in the air. That is why we are creating a Ukrainian national air carrier. For the first time in many years, the carrier will be able to fly to our new regional airports that we are building. In total, we are currently building them in 16 cities of Ukraine. We also want to build an airport of international importance in Zakarpattia, between Uzhhorod and Mukachevo - this is a new project, and two airports in eastern Ukraine. Because Donbas is Ukraine.

The first flight of the national carrier will take place in 2022. By 2025, the company's fleet will be fully formed - at least 20 aircraft. Regular flights will be launched both inside and outside.

The Ukrainian carrier should be seen not only in Ukraine, but also all over the world. And this will be greatly helped by the open skies agreement, the visa-free air travel, which we have finally signed with the European Union. Therefore, UNA will definitely land in the EU. And such big plans really inspire.

Independence is a natural driving force of every person. Therefore, we will launch 10 new Intercity + trains, 80 new electric trains and almost 500 new modern Ukrainian-made sleeping cars.

An independent country is where you will be healthy, regardless of your social status. To do this, we launched the Healthy Ukraine program for the first time, within which we have already built 600 activity parks, 900 sports grounds, 193 stadiums and 25 swimming pools.

There are 9,000 sports grounds ahead and the beginning of the state program - 19 ice arenas, hundreds of CYSS and sports boarding schools, new sports palaces. They will become our new places of strength and health of the nation, health of our future - our children.

We have set clear goals from the very beginning. Driving children to schools and kindergartens must take no more than 30 minutes on a quality road. Everything must be clear, modern, and meet all international standards. And more and more such new schools and kindergartens must be built every day. So far we are building, maybe not too much, but more than 150 kindergartens. There will be another 300. 200 new schools have been built. There will be another 300.

For the first time in many years we started to build our domestic locomotives and wagons in Kremenchuh. For the first time in many years, we began to build our modern Ukrainian tanks in Kharkiv. And this construction is really big and is getting bigger every day. Infrastructure is new jobs, a new quality of life for everyone.

An independent country is a smart country. Educated. That is why a strong country is impossible with a weak education. We support talented students. New state and presidential prizes have been introduced: UAH 100,000 to the winners of international student competitions in mathematics, physics, computer science and chemistry. This year, for the first time, we are awarding prizes not only to the students, but also to the teachers who trained these champions. Graduates with the highest external testing score receive UAH 10,000 per month. 250 students. 10 best from each region of Ukraine. And for us, each region of Ukraine is the best.

This year we have increased student scholarships to the subsistence level. At the same time, we will not reduce the number of scholarship holders. It is very important.

This year we have provided more than 60,000 teachers with laptops, and by 2023 every teacher in our country will have a new laptop!

For the first time for the state, cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, nanotechnology, aerospace, energy and biotechnology are not just clever words, but priority programs of study at the Presidential University, which we are beginning to create.

Two years ago, the National Research Foundation was established. This is a grant support for science. In two years, 222 research projects received about 1 billion hryvnias. These are scientific developments involving more than 1,500 leading and young Ukrainian scientists.

For the first time in many years we are restoring the scientific fleet of Ukraine. Imagine, the last voyage of a Ukrainian scientific ship in the World Ocean took place 20 years ago, and in the Black Sea - 10 years ago. We've got two ships this year - not many, but we got them! This is the ship "Boris Alexandrov", which will perform scientific and environmental research in the Black Sea, and the icebreaker "Noosphere" to explore the World Ocean, as well as to carry out our expeditions to the Ukrainian Vernadsky Research Base in Antarctica.

Our independence is an opportunity to remember and cherish our past, being confident in the future. We are finally building the Babyn Yar Memorial Complex, and next year we will complete the construction of the Holodomor Memorial Complex. Shared memory, shared pain is what unites us and makes us stronger.

And the bearers of this memory are people of respectable age. Some will say that it is correct to say "elderly people". No! For everything they really did, it is right to say "people of respectable age."

I am ashamed that we have done too little for them all these years. For some it is just the main electorate, and for me it is people who have given their whole lives for the benefit of Ukraine, for the benefit of our state. Therefore, one of my key priorities is caring for people of respectable age. In particular, we have already implemented a program of additional payments to pensions for people aged 80 and 75. Next year, we will extend this program to people who have reached the age of 70.

We clearly comply with our commitment in respect of the annual indexation of pensions. Thus, since March 2021, the pensions of 7.9 million pensioners have been indexed.

For the first time in many years, pensions for liquidators and victims of the Chornobyl disaster have been significantly increased.

For the first time in all years of independence, we have agreed on the parameters of a reliable mandatory funded pension system, which will allow us to save money for a decent old age. In the near future, the parliament will consider a relevant bill. Dear deputies, especially deputies of respectable age, I count on you.

For the first time, we have introduced a comprehensive approach to solving the problems of people who face various barriers. These are people with disabilities from childhood, the amount of care allowance has been increased for them; these are low-income families, for which the amount of benefits has increased by 50% equaling UAH 5,500; these are also children who have suffered from explosive objects - they have been provided with assistance for the first time; these are also people who have suffered from domestic violence - for the first time a subvention has been introduced to create shelters for them; this includes families with children; fathers who for the first time got the right to go on leave to care for newborns. We have increased state aid for children with serious illnesses. All these are features of a country with a European face. Or, more simply, a country with a human face.

The same goes for the digital country. Independence is a digital freedom from bureaucracy, queues and corruption. And more than 11 million users of our state application "Diia" have already seen this.

Ukraine became the first country in the world to introduce a digital passport of a citizen of its state. We've introduced a digital driver's license that allows you to travel or open a bank account online.

“Diia” includes a digital student ID, a car insurance, an electronic signature on a smartphone, a digital tax number, payment of taxes and fines and much more.

This is not an imaginary metaworld - these are real services that help real citizens in real time. Already today, now, 24/7.

And today, a residence registration is added to these functions - that is, the ability to change residence registration online.

In the 21st century, people can move freely around the country, regardless of passport stamps. "Diia" is first and foremost a social application for all citizens. Now it is not the woman in the office who will be able to assign or transfer the pension to our esteemed people, but the grandson on the sofa. We are already starting the launch of this feature, and "Diia" will cover all Ukrainians, regardless of age.

Independence is the opportunity to do business independently, honestly and transparently in an independent state. Business opening services in Ukraine will be the fastest in the world. You can already open a sole proprietor in 10 minutes. See and fill out a tax declaration, pay taxes.

We are building our own business, independent of the "wishes" of officials, which takes into account all the wishes of businessmen. To do this, we will finally launch "Diia City", which will allow Ukraine to create the most powerful IT hub in Central and Eastern Europe. Ukrainians and entrepreneurs from all over the world will be able to quickly implement the most ambitious innovative and business ideas and implement them effectively. In five years, "Diia City" will help double the size of the IT market - up to $ 11.8 billion, and increase the number of jobs up to 450 thousand. These will be some of the best conditions for running an IT business and creative industry in the world.

There are plans to launch important functions soon: an e-census, which will later lead to an e-voting. At the heart of our transformation is the people, and we need to know how many of us are there, where we live.

I am proud that Ukraine will be the second country in the world to conduct a census in cooperation with Apple in February 2023.

Our goal is that Ukrainians can get 100% of the state's services online - without officials, without queues, without corruption.

But the fight against corruption is both a fair and independent court. Judicial reform in Ukraine. There is nothing to be proud of here yet. We are just beginning this difficult path. We only voted for the first two laws. I thank every deputy who supported the laws on the High Council of Justice and the High Qualification Commission of Judges. Thank you.

This is not the first time that judicial reform has been launched in Ukraine, but it will be completed for the first time. I thank all the deputies once again for their support of the bills, and I would also like to thank our international partners who support us on this difficult path. Thanks. And this path will be really difficult.

For the first time in 30 years, land reform has been fully voted on. I congratulate you! For the first time in 30 years we are starting a full-scale arrangement of the state border around the perimeter of our state. Finally, we passed the law on territorial defense, we approved the Strategy for the deoccupation of Crimea.

For the first time in 30 years, we have started a systematic fight against the oligarchs. And I am confident that Ukraine will win this fight. Ukraine will end with this.

But I do not want to end my speech with this topic - about the oligarchs. I don't want to talk about small things at the end. I want to say about the main thing: about the state in its true colours, non-expurgated, to speak to you absolutely frankly, honestly, because that's how we were elected, because that's what we were, and I want to believe that we remain so.

We must speak openly, in spite of all difficulties, tell the truth as it is, which we could tell or still can, I want to believe that.

And then - let's be honest. The war in Donbas has been going on for eight years. Eight years since Russia annexed Crimea. And I'm not afraid to tell that to everyone and tell that directly to Russians. That is why, at the same time, I am not afraid to talk to them directly. We are not afraid of direct dialogue.

We know which European countries support Ukraine, it is true, and we thank them. We know which European countries pretend to support Ukraine and our independence.

We know that our army is the best in the world and it will protect us. Everyone supports us, but no one but our army will protect us. It's true. And we must admit that without our army we will not be able to stop the war. And we must tell the truth that we will not be able to stop the war without direct talks with Russia. And today it has been recognized by all, all external partners. All external partners have acknowledged that, and some internal partners still do not. We must speak, knowing that we have a strong, powerful army. And we must not be afraid to tell each other the truth now. If we want to return Donbas - let's do so. And if we just want to talk about it, let's do nothing.

And let's put an end to this issue, simply and honestly. And let's finally understand - this is our state, let's fight for it, for our territories, by all means, all together with all politicians, regardless of the color of these politicians. And with all businessmen, regardless of their caliber, it's not too late

Every year at the end of autumn, we are all united by a difficult date. And this fourth Saturday in November is actually the first for many of us. By the depth of pain and anger at the same time. By the polarity of what we experience this day. From the feeling of loss to the loss of any feelings. On this day, we are full of emotions and devastated at the same time. We light a candle and get cold shivers.

On this day we cry so quietly that even our silence can be heard. On this day, we honor the millions of our dead ancestors and pray for the souls of millions of dead Ukrainians. This is Holodomor Remembrance Day.

A day when we remember the night. Some of the darkest nights not of the year, not of the decade, but of the whole century in the life of our people. The life that is hard to call life. These are people who were left without a crumb of bread. Parents left without their children. Children left without parents. Generations left without hope. And questions that still remain unanswered.

What is the exact number of Ukrainians killed? Will we ever be able to determine it? What truth do we still not know? Will we ever be able to discover it? How could the government live with all this and conceal crimes for years, decades? Will we ever be able to forget about them? We know the answer to this question - no. We will never forget our ancestors who died in 1921, 1922 and 1923. In 1946 and 1947. And in the worst 1932 and 1933, arranged by the totalitarian Stalinist regime, the years of the Holodomor-genocide.

We have actually completed the reconstruction of the first stage of the Holodomor Museum. Next year marks the 90th anniversary of this terrible tragedy. And by this date we must build the second stage of the historically important museum. I signed a corresponding decree on this and a number of other measures. And it's not just a matter of duty, respect or honor. This is a question of our existence. Because as soon as the memory of millions of dead and unborn Ukrainians disappears, we will disappear ourselves. We will die ourselves. As a nation, as a society, as a state. As people.

We still do not know the names of many Ukrainians who died from the Holodomor. It destroyed entire families, streets, villages. So there is no one to ask. But it could not destroy us completely. So there is someone to remember. And there is someone to pass the memory to the next generations. About the fact that the horror called “Holodomor” has not been described by any dictionary before. Because no ruler has ever been able to invent such an atrocity before. We as a nation have survived this horror. The key word is “survived”. And we won. And the innocent victims of the Holodomor are tortured, murdered, but not forgotten!

There are about five thousand peoples on our planet. Their portrait, archetype, mentality is a confusing web of historical events for ethnographers. But there is one thing that, in my opinion, simply yet accurately depicts the character of the people. This is his national holidays. What unites everyone is important to everyone. November 21 is just such a day. The answer to the questions: who are Ukrainians and what is most important for them?

Today we celebrate the Day of Dignity and Freedom. A holiday that shows that dignity and freedom is a holiday for us. This is our air.

No. It doesn't sound too loud. When someone decides to restrain us, that's when it's too loud. When the authorities do not hear the Ukrainian people, then it is too loud.

That is why we are free. Free to create the future. And we should be proud of that. We shouldn’t act superior. But we should not lower our eyes as well. Yes. We have paid and continue to pay a high price for freedom. And we will never forget all those who gave their lives for Ukraine. And we will never forgive all those who took their lives and wanted to deprive us of our freedom. But the main thing is that they didn’t succeed and will never succeed.

And it's time to change self-perception and thinking. We are not victims, we are not oppressed, we are not divided, we are not captured. We are beautiful, strong, brave, smart, talented people. Invincible.

Precisely because we have dignity. For us, slavery is a humiliation. Loss of freedom is a loss of honor. Loss of honor is a loss of the heart. Loss of the heart is a loss of the soul. And loss of the soul for us is a loss of life. That is why we are ready to fight at the cost of our own lives. In order not to lose our life.

For us, dignity and freedom have long gone beyond common understanding. I will never forget the story our sailors told when they returned home. They were in captivity, but they were not captivated by the spirit. Investigators asked them to laugh a little quieter: "The authorities will not understand".

People usually cry here, and our sailors laugh incessantly. They sat in a paddy wagon, sang the national anthem and then told the driver: "Boss, to Odesa! In Koblevo, let’s have a break and get some coffee."

They did not behave like captives. And they remained officers and soldiers. Because they have not lost their dignity. And they proved that in a foreign land, in captivity, in prison, you can be a free person. Because freedom is not the absence of handcuffs. This is the absence of prison in their heads.

Vasyl Stus knew this for sure. When a wave of arrests of creative youth swept through Ukraine, at the premiere of Parajanov's “Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors”, he stood up and said: "Everyone who opposes arrests, stand up." A few people got up, then more, then more. Not all. But he was not alone. Stus knew that by doing so, he could lose his freedom. But he knew that if he didn't, he would definitely lose his dignity.

Omelyan Kovch also knew this. A priest who rescued Jews in the Holocaust by giving them baptismal records. For this he was sent to the Majdanek concentration camp. And in order not to lose dignity, he was forced to lose his freedom forever. In the letter, he apologized to his children for not agreeing to early release and staying there. "These people need me here. Feeling that they will soon die, they all come to me for confession. If I go, they will be left without hope. They have already been deprived of dignity, honor, freedom, home, relatives, names, they will soon be deprived of their lives. I will not allow taking away their hope."

Leonid Bykov did not give up principles and creative freedom. For this, for the filming of the "Only "Old Men" Are Going Into Battle" he was given not a color but a black-and-white film. Did this damage his dignity? Maybe. But did he lose it? No. And he made a film that is adored by millions. Not colored.

But about people who have dignity. And freedom.

Like everyone who stood on Maidan, on the barricades, on the granite. In 1990, in 2004 and 2014.

Like those who then met in the trenches in the east of our state, defending it.

All. Different. The guys from the West, and the guys from the Southeast.

Speaking different languages. Residents of Volyn, Odesa, Galicia, Dnipro, Zakarpattia, Bukovyna. With the cross, with the crescent, with the star of David. From Kharkiv, from Ternopil, from Kryvyi Rih, from Ivano-Frankivsk.

Cherkasy, Vinnytsia, Mykolaiv, Chernihiv, Sumy, Kherson, Khmelnytskyi, Zaporizhzhia. From Kyiv. From Donbas, from the Luhansk region, from Crimea.

All. Different. But Ukrainians. Defenders. Everyone who knows: you have to be worthy, not give up. Because Ukrainians are not used to giving up. Because they have dignity. And therefore - freedom!

Dear Mr. President, dear heads of state, government, ladies and gentlemen!

It's time to wake up!

This is the appeal of the UN Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, to the world leaders, to you and me on the eve of the Assembly. For me, this call is special.

For me, every night before the UN General Assembly is a sleepless night.

In 2019, this was the excitement before the first speech. 2020 in general was a sleepless year for the world through COVID-19. And about last night I will tell in more detail. 3 am. Dozens of calls. There was an attempt on the life of the first aide to the President of Ukraine. 12 shots. Three of them hit the driver.

Here is the price of change in the state, here is the price of reforms.

Fortunately, Serhiy is alive. Fortunately, nothing threatens the driver's life for now. But this speech of mine will be atypical for the UN. Although I believe - definitely useful for each of you.

Is it time to wake up?

I can say without flattery and cunning: Ukraine did it a long time ago, since then it has not fallen asleep. It did not fall asleep when it survived the Holodomor, Babyn Yar. Did not fall asleep when the whole world survived two wars, the Holocaust, lost 100 million people. This was the price for humanity to realize that all nations, all countries are equal, and all conflicts must be resolved through dialogues and only through dialogues, not tanks. Believing this, in 1945 Ukraine became one of the founding members of the United Nations. Today, they would be shocked to see the words "ensure the rights of all peoples" in the theme of the General Assembly. I'm sure they would say, "What have you been doing all these 76 years?"

The answer was given by COVID-19. We played equality, we played unity, where it's one thing to share common goals, and it's another to share vaccines together. Life-giving vaccines. It turned out that in articles about equality, as in advertising, there are stars and the inscription in small print: "We are all people, we are all in the same boat, but lifeboats will first be given to the 1st class passengers."

Ukraine did not expect help from others. And helped others without waiting for gratitude. We sent our doctors to Italy, sent the necessary assets. Ukraine helped everyone who needed it at a time when the world had forgotten that the pandemic would not last forever, and that all nations would one day gather here again. But how will they look each other in the eyes now? Ukraine is not ashamed.

It has the right to say: we want to revive the UN. To begin with, its Charter must be revived. These are not recommendations that can be followed at will. You will not find the words "Every man for himself" there. And then the world would not have to admit that it failed the test of COVID-19, the test of unity. And it would not have to hide face on the 20th anniversary of the UN Durban Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. Who could have imagined that drugs would one day be an instrument of discrimination? In the context of constant conversations about the global food crisis, it is interesting: will we ever share bread and water in the same way?!

Are we waking up? I want to believe that.

Because COVID-19 was not completely overcome. And the global vaccination plan has not gone anywhere. Plus, the guarantees that there will be no new viruses in the world are as "strong" as the security guarantees of the Budapest Memorandum.

Is it time to wake up? Honestly - Ukraine did not fall asleep. It is difficult to do so due to the sounds of explosions, the sounds of shots being heard in our occupied Donbas for the eighth year in a row. In 2019, I said from this rostrum: the war in Ukraine is more than 13 thousand dead. 30 thousand wounded. Imagine: one and a half million people are forced to leave their homes. Every year these figures are heard in the UN with only one amendment - every year, unfortunately, these figures are growing. I talked about this in 2020. And I'm talking about it now, in 2021. And this is almost 15 thousand people killed already. And even more wounded. And even more homeless people.

Here is the price of freedom, here is the price of independence.

Probably shots are not heard as loudly in Central Park or Madison Square Garden as in Avdiivka industrial zone or Svitlodarsk Arc. We want to revive the UN? Maybe the UN should move for this? Be mobile and fast? Maybe it's time for us to meet where we can really hear and see these global problems? There are thousands of trouble spots in the world. Ukraine is ready to participate in UN meetings alongside any of them. In my opinion, the truth is needed to revive the UN.

If all those in power had sincerely supported the peace-loving efforts of the world community, shells would not have exploded on Afghan land today, and machine guns would not have terrorized the civilian population.

These are the words of the first representative of independent Ukraine to the UN Leonid Kravchuk - the first President of independent Ukraine, said 30 years ago at the 46th UN General Assembly.

30 years were not enough for humanity for these words to lose their relevance.

One day was enough for Ukraine to start an operation to rescue civilians in Kabul.

Our military evacuated almost 700 people. These are citizens of Ukraine, as well as citizens of many other, different countries, members of human rights organizations, journalists of various media: Global Mail, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, Stars and Stripes. They were men, women, children, elderly people from different countries, of different nationalities, of different religions.

This, I believe, is a commitment to the basic principles of the United Nations.

The participation of 46 states and international organizations in the first Summit of the Crimea Platform on the deoccupation of Crimea is a commitment to the basic principles of the United Nations. And I am very grateful to each of these countries.

And the fact that the UN has ignored the platform for solving the problems of international law and occupation is some new, unapproved principles. If we want to revive the UN, let us remember that there are no chosen ones here who cannot be offended. The UN is all of us, it's 193 countries.

And I invite all these countries to join the joint declaration of the participants of the Crimea Platform, condemning the occupation and showing that you are against the forceful change of borders in the world.

This is not irony or trolling, but this format will always be open to Russia. And I'm ready to explain why.

Because no one in the world feels safe anymore. I emphasize: no one feels safe. And no one can hide behind international law like behind a stone wall. This can lead to the collapse of the entire architecture of international relations. Then we really won't have any rules, except for the right of the strong. It will be a world in which, instead of collective work, selfishness will dominate, a world in which there will be more and more dictatorship, and less and less equality, less real democracy and freedom.

After all, what is state sovereignty? First of all, it is a question of freedom, free choice of one's own destiny for each person, for the people, for the state.

All I have said now in Russian is the words of Russian President Vladimir Putin said in Munich in 2007 and at the UN General Assembly in 2015.

Were they untrue?

Unfortunately, we know Moscow's answer. In early September this year, Nariman Dzhelyalov, the first deputy chairman of the Crimean Tatar People's Mejlis, was illegally detained in Crimea. Russia accuses this political scientist, prominent journalist, TV presenter, teacher of law and history of trying to blow up a section of the gas pipeline.

Here is the price of freedom, here is the price of fighting for your rights, for human rights.

I really count on the support of the international community in the issue of his release and the release of about 450 Ukrainians illegally detained in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine and in the Russian Federation.

I urge you to support the updated resolutions on the human rights situation in the occupied Crimea and the militarization of our Ukrainian occupied peninsula, which will be submitted to the General Assembly by the end of the year.

We are grateful that the item on the "Situation in the Temporarily Occupied Territories of Ukraine" was included in the agenda of this Assembly. Although how, remaining occupied, Crimea and Donbas can disappear from the agenda?! This is obvious not only to us. I thank all the states that mentioned Ukraine in their speeches here this year. It is very important. And many others who are not ashamed that Ukraine is their friend and partner. Who can call things by their names: call occupation occupation, and call aggression aggression, without fear that someone will leave this hall for everyone to see. It is not necessary to do this, it is a platform for dialogue. It will definitely not bring happiness to Ukraine. It could bring happiness to Ukraine if someone left our state territories, our state borders for everyone to see.

In 1945, the Yalta Conference was held in Crimea, where new foundations of the world order were laid and it was decided to hold the first Conference on the Establishment of the United Nations. Both Yalta and Crimea have been occupied for eight years now.

How do we want to revive the UN if the place where the idea of the UN originated is occupied by a permanent member of the UN Security Council? Mr. President of the 76th Assembly spoke a lot about climate change and the protection of the environment and nature on the planet. In this context, Crimea needs even more UN’s attention. They made a military base out of unique nature. Instead of fauna and flora there is a fleet and soldiers. And in the souls of the Crimean people, there is a problem opposite to the world - not global warming, but global devastation.

We should admit, the world does not have enough time to sort all problems out. The UN raises very important issues and does not have time to solve them, because new important topics are emerging. Every time we seem to choose a "global disaster of the year". Which in a year few people will remember, because there will be a new one. Every Assembly the world puts them in a large backpack of threat, which it has been bearing for years and which is already overfilled. If we look even deeper - there is famine, poverty, literacy, drinking water, clean air, occupation in it. We don't have enough time to solve this. And most importantly - we lack the courage. Because we act not as leaders, but as politicians.

Who are simply afraid that someday humanity will ask them about all this. And they leave a way out - we did not promise you anything. We did not promise to overcome famine. We said that we would make every effort to overcome it. We did not promise to overcome climate change. We promised to intensify our cooperation to overcome climate change. How much time, paper, energy have we spent on these "we are determined", "we have confirmed a common interest in overcoming", "we have agreed to significantly strengthen cooperation"? We want to revive the UN? Let's talk to each other simply, let's speak clearly, concretely, and most importantly - honestly, frankly. Then we will stop calling the UN General Assembly a "debate." This is not a debate. Because debate is a lively dialogue. This is an active dispute between different parties. This is an opportunity to ask direct, frank questions. For example, issuing hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians in the occupied territory of Ukraine hundreds of thousands of passports of another state. Isn’t it evidence of an international crime? Isn't it proof of impunity and disrespect for international law? Moreover, the Russian Federation itself officially declares it. And it forces our citizens of Ukraine to take part in the elections to the Russian parliament.

And if the UN does not react efficiently and strongly to this...

Isn’t it proof that it is too late to revive the UN?

But I believe it is not. And the UN must support those who want to change the world for the better. Today, Ukraine is presenting a number of initiatives, platforms and summits. Let's take only one - the Crimea Platform. It must work under the auspices of the United Nations. If every nation has such an effective platform, approved by the UN, which solves problems and works 24/7, that means reviving the UN. Because it means to revive faith in the UN among ordinary people.

Ladies and Gentlemen! I understand that criticism of the UN is often heard. But we criticize ourselves.

The UN is not a building, the UN is the leaders. And it was they who created the UN 76 years ago.

Could they have predicted and anticipated everything? I'm sure not.

Could they have imagined that the veto mechanism as a symbol that "one can be right for all" would become a tool when one could blackmail everyone. No.

Does this mean that everything is lost? I'm sure not.

We, and therefore the UN, just need to believe in ourselves again.

The UN has long heard only criticism. The accusation that the UN can do nothing.

And the worst accusation is that "the UN has become a League of Nations."

And today the UN is like a retired superhero who has forgotten what he could do. He considers himself a burden, a weak, frail, useless old man, whose life was in vain. Or maybe the UN will remember something?

How has more than a billion people accessed drinking water for the first time since 1981?

Who explained to the wild world that everyone has rights? And that they need to be protected. Who gave the first document, where they are described in detail?

Who provides food to 90 million people in 83 countries?

Thanks to whom did the shame called apartheid disappear from the planet?

Whose "blue helmets" have maintained and continue to maintain peace in dozens of countries? Who created UNESCO, which protects the Vatican, Versailles, the Acropolis and a total of 1154 unique cultural heritage sites? Who created UNICEF, which protects children in more than 190 countries? Children are the most important for us.

Therefore, the call to unite for them cannot be banal or outdated. Unite for the sake of children. The most important thing we have.

What do you say, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Heads of State and Government? Let's show that we are determined to make every effort to strengthen our interaction!

And let’s just do it. Even without resolutions, declarations, coordination of positions. Just do it.

As people.

As nations.

As united nations!

Who made their choice.

Their actions will either be filled with meaning or these chairs will be empty.

Here is the price of this choice!

Dear Ladies and Gentlemen!

Distinguished guests of Ukraine!

Our brothers, our partners, our friends!

Fellow citizens of Ukraine!

Dear Ukrainian people!

I congratulate all of us on this great and important day! Today we celebrate the 30th anniversary of the proclamation of Ukraine's independence!

The 30th anniversary of its obtaining! And it is fairer, in my opinion, to say: the 30th anniversary of the restoration of Ukraine's independence! Because on August 24, 1991, Ukraine restored its statehood. And on August 24, 2021, Ukraine finally realizes this, talks about it, and is proud of it.

After all, our history and our state are unique.

Our Constitution is 25 years old. But our Constitution is 311 years old. Written by Pylyp Orlyk, it is finally at home, and everyone can see it in St. Sophia Cathedral, built more than a thousand years ago.

Our hryvnia is a quarter of a century old, and it depicts, in particular, Prince Volodymyr. But our hryvnia is more than a millennium old, it existed under Prince Volodymyr. Our trident was approved in the Constitution of Ukraine 25 years ago. And our trident was embossed on the plinth bricks of the Tithe Church 1025 years ago.

This year the Armed Forces of Ukraine celebrated the 30th anniversary of its establishment.

And in 1616 the armed forces of Ukraine rejoiced at the capture of the fortress Kafa.

All this testifies to one thing: we are a young country with a thousand-year history.

We build our house on the land where our ancestors lived and built.

We are not guests or lodgers.

We are a young family from the glorious dynasty of Kyivan Rus’ - Ukraine.

From the ancestry of founders. Ancestry of baptists. From a brave ancestry. Wise ancestry. Cossack ancestry. We are not orphans and foundlings.

We are descendants of a powerful country that was the center of Europe.

But we should not only feel accordingly.

We must behave accordingly.

We are the heirs of the statehood that existed more than a thousand years ago.

And we are beginning to celebrate the Day of Ukrainian Statehood.

We consider the year of Kyiv's foundation to be its starting point. The capital of Kyivan Rus’ - Ukraine, which is rightly called the city where it all begins.

Orthodoxy originated here, the Old Slavonic language originated here, and its successor is the modern Ukrainian language.

This is where our statehood began. We will celebrate the birth of our statehood on the day of the flowering of our statehood - on the Day of Christianization of Kyivan Rus’ - Ukraine.

And I am signing the relevant decree on all this today.

We are also beginning the process of returning prominent Ukrainians to their homeland. Who lived for Ukraine. Fought for Ukraine. Who are buried not in Ukraine. These are hetmans of the Zaporizhzhia Sich, figures of the times of the Ukrainian People's Republic, participants of liberation struggle, figures of culture and science and many others.

We will return not only our people. We will return what belongs to us.

These are historical and cultural values of Ukraine that are abroad.

We will never give anyone a single stone of our history again, we will not allow "occupying" any page of our history, "annexing" our writers, our scientists, our athletes, our heroes who defeated Nazism.

I devote a lot of time to the glorious past so that we can all finally believe in ourselves in the future and build a powerful state together. What is a powerful country?

A country that dreams ambitiously and acts decisively.

A country that is not afraid of the words "first time".

That is why, for the first time in 30 years, Antonov is building three planes for the state. New tanks and helicopters with Ukrainian blades are being built for the army this year.

A powerful country is reviving its naval fleet, naval bases and building corvettes.

A powerful country is a country that adopts a missile program for 10 years.

Which builds thousands of kilometers of roads. Hundreds of schools, kindergartens, hospitals.

Which is the first in the world to have a digital passport.

Which fulfills its promises and lifts the immunity of deputies.

Which for the first time gives people real ownership of land.

And launches democracy for the first time.

Such a country becomes a NATO partner with enhanced opportunities.

Such a country will be officially supported by others when it applies to join the EU. But if it is such a country, it won’t need to ask for an invitation, others will invite it.

We are doing many things for the first time, so that the time when Ukraine was a great country was not the last.

And so that the times when Crimea and Donbas were not occupied were not the last either.

And a powerful country does not expect anyone to solve its problems.

It holds the Crimea Platform, which brings together 46 foreign countries.

We are fighting for our people there. Because it is possible to temporarily occupy territories, but it is impossible to occupy people's love for Ukraine.

It is possible to create despair and force to receive passports, but it is impossible to passportize Ukrainian hearts.

The fact that people in Donbas and Crimea are afraid to say it does not mean that they are afraid to think about it.

And they will come back. Because we are a family. And the only thing that can divide us is a generously set table. At which we will definitely drink a toast together to the fact that we have become a powerful country.

But it is equally important for all of us to understand how to remain such a country.

We argue so much about the past, which means we don't draw conclusions from our own great history. For no enemy has dealt us a greater blow than our own strife.

What is the strength of the Ukrainian people? It is the Ukrainian people.

Citizens of Ukraine of all nationalities.

Today, for the first time in history, I want to name those who live in Ukraine, so that we finally understand that the Ukrainian people are Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars, Karaites, Krymchaks, Russians, Belarusians, Moldovans, Bulgarians, Hungarians, Romanians, Poles, Jews, Armenians, Greeks, Roma, Georgians, Gagauz, Azerbaijanis, Uzbeks, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, Turkmens and Tajiks, Lithuanians, Estonians and Latvians, Turks, Koreans, Bashkirs, Lezgins, Avars, Mari, Germans, Slovaks, Czechs and Finns, Komi, Albanians, Karelians, Chechens, Ossetians, Abkhazians, Kabardians, Tabasarans, Dargins, Arabs, Laks. And we are all citizens of Ukraine.

The national team of Ukraine. One team.

It is strong because it has 25 regions - 25 irreplaceable players. And invincible when it realizes that we are invincible, that everyone is needed.

Without the helicopters of Zaporizhzhia and Antonov planes, Ukraine would not have conquered the sky. Without the ships of Mykolaiv Ukraine wouldn't have conquered the sea.

Without Dnipro's Pivdenmash, Korolev from Zhytomyr and Kadeniuk from Bukovyna, Ukraine would never have conquered space.

And without the Kharkiv T-34 it would not have won on the fields of World War II.

Without Oleshky sands in the Kherson region, Buky canyon in the Cherkasy region, basalt pillars of the Rivne region, without the Carpathian mountains and gob piles, the Dnieper, Desna and the Southern Bug, Ukraine is not so charming.

Without a cup of Lviv coffee, the morning is not so cheerful.

Without a glass of Odesa wine, the evening is not so pleasant.

And without a glass of homemade liqueur from any corner of Ukraine, Independence Day is not so festive.

The Rivne region gave us the first President of Ukraine. The Chernihiv region - the second. The Sumy region - the third.

The Donetsk region gave us Leonid Bykov and Serhiy Bubka.

The Luhansk region - Volodymyr Dahl.

The Kirovohrad region presented Karpenko-Kary and Kropyvnytskyi, and with them - a theater. The Zhytomyr region - Lesya Ukrainka and poetry.

The Poltava region - Mykola Lysenko and opera. The Ternopil region - Solomiya Krushelnytska and a divine voice. The Vinnytsia region - Vasyl Stus and indomitable spirit. Ukraine is not so strong without the Kamianets-Podilskyi Fortress, Volyn Lubart’s Castle and Akkerman in the Odesa region. Without the Lavra and St. Sophia, the Church of St. Nicholas and the Cathedral of St. George, the Khan's Mosque in Bakhchysarai and the Synagogue in Dnipro, Ukraine is not so multifaceted.

Dear Ukrainians, fellow citizens of our state!

Look or imagine our flag now.

Imagine that there is no yellow in it.

Now imagine that there is no blue in it.

Agree, alone - it's just colors. Not so bright. Not so interesting.

And together - it is the best and strongest combination for us.

This is why we are strong together.

Why we, so different, from east and west, Ukrainian-speaking and Russian-speaking, must be one family.

Because Ukraine unites us. Because we all tell it: "You are my only one!"

Because we all defend it.

Different. Equal. Kindred!

Strong! Free! Independent!

Glory to Ukraine!

Fellow citizens!

On this holiday, we must remember thanks to whom we can be here. These are our defenders of Ukraine. Defenders of our independence. Heroes who gave their lives for it!

Let's honor their bright memory with a moment of silence!

(A moment of silence)

They died for the future of our children and grandchildren.

We are sure that they will definitely celebrate the 130th anniversary of Ukraine's independence and the thousandth anniversary of our state's independence here.

To do this, let’s remember the past, act today, think about the future.

Today we celebrate the Day of Christianization of Kyivan Rus’ - Ukraine.

This is the official, and most importantly - historically fair name of the holiday, which emphasizes the inseparability of the two states. There is a thousand years and one mark between Kyivan Rus’ and Ukraine. There is a dash between them in the text of the relevant decree of the President of Ukraine. And it's not just a punctuation mark. This is a sign that Ukraine is the successor of one of the most powerful states in medieval Europe. In its capital, which is the capital of modern Ukraine, the history of Christianity in Eastern Europe began, when 1033 years ago Grand Prince Volodymyr of Kyiv christened Kyivan Rus’. Kyivan Rus’ - Ukraine.

This is not part of our history, this is our history itself. We do not need to prove it with historical treatises, works, or articles. Because our evidence is not on paper, it is in metal and stone. Not in myths and legends, but in our cities and on our streets.

It is easy for us to overcome the path to the treasures of the past thanks to the trends of the present. Taking an electric scooter, you can get and see the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra, St. Michael's Golden-Domed Cathedral, Askold's Grave.

Going out of the "Arsenalna" metro station, taking coffee and walking a few hundred meters, we see the Church of the Saviour at Berestove, which was first mentioned in 1072 and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Volodymyr Monomakh's son and Volodymyr's great-grandson Yury Dolgoruky is buried in it. The Grand Prince of Kyiv. The Founder of Moscow.

To immerse yourself in the world of the history of your own statehood, a few subway trips are also enough. And only on one "green" branch of the subway you can touch the history, so to speak, without transfers. These are Vydubychi and Vydubychi monastery. This is the main gate of ancient Kyiv built by Yaroslav the Wise - the Golden Gate.

And St. Cyril's Church, built by another great-grandson of Volodymyr - Vsevolod Olgovich. Founded in 1140 in Dorohozhychi, it became a symbolic place that connected Kyiv with other possessions and branches of state roots.

And not only the capital, but also the whole of great Ukraine is rich in millennial monuments about him. These are the Transfiguration Cathedral, the Piatnytska Church in Chernihiv, St. Basil’s Cathedral in Ovruch, Yurieva Bozhnytsia in Oster, the slopes of Vytachiv.

This is the Volodymyr’s Cathedral in the Ukrainian Crimea, in the Ukrainian Chersonesos, where the Ukrainian ruler, Grand Prince Volodymyr of Kyiv, according to one version, was baptized.

These are Pereiaslav, Lutsk, Volodymyr-Volynskyi, Halych, Novhorod-Siverskyi, Bakhmach and many other cities of Ukraine built during the times of Kyivan Rus’.

And this, in my opinion, is one of the things that testifies to the main thing - the historical unity of all Ukrainians. One of the things that proves that all Ukrainians, from any corner of Ukraine, is one great nation. Ukrainian nation. These words are not a tribute to the state of affairs, but a tribute to the truth and justice.

Kyivan Rus’ is the mother of our history. 24 regions of Ukraine and the Crimean peninsula are her own children. And they are rightfully her heirs. And cousins and very distant relatives should not encroach on her legacy. They should not try to prove their involvement in the history of thousands of years and thousands of events, being from the places where they took place thousands of kilometers away.

It is no secret that the Grand Prince of Kyiv enjoys significant respect among all churches and denominations. Volodymyr the Baptist was canonized by both the Orthodox and the Catholic Church as a saint equal to apostles. We can say that it is thanks to him that all churches and denominations are present in modern Ukraine.

Nowhere in the world are there analogues of the Ukrainian Council of Churches, which includes all Orthodox, Greek Catholic, Roman Catholic, Protestant, Evangelical churches, Jewish and Muslim religious associations.

And all of them repeatedly hold joint prayers for Ukraine in the very place where I am now. This is St. Sophia’s Cathedral. The majestic guardian of the history of Ukrainian statehood - the history of Kyivan Rus’.

It was the historical foundation for the creation of the Cossack Hetmanate. It was the historical basis at a time when in the Pedagogical Museum on the street named after Grand Prince Volodymyr, the Central Council of Ukraine announced the creation of the Ukrainian People's Republic, chose the Volodymyr’s symbol - trident - as its emblem, and called the currency hryvnia - in memory of the first currency of Kyivan Rus’.

And together all these three epochs were the basis when in 1991 Ukraine declared its independence. This year we will celebrate only the 30th anniversary of its obtaining. But our national currency is the hryvnia, like a hundred years ago and a thousand years ago. It is symbolic that its recent history was started by the Grand Prince, who is depicted on one hryvnia.

Our modern currency will be only 25 years old. At the same time, it will be 1025 years since Volodymyr has built the Tithe Church.

A trident was embossed on each of its plinth bricks, and Volodymyr donated a tenth of gold and silver coins, which also had a trident, for its construction. And, as a hundred years ago, as a thousand years ago, the trident is our State Emblem.

In 1240 the Tithe Church was destroyed by Batu Khan. And after the restoration, in 1928, it was destroyed for the second time by the Soviet authorities.

The Church of the Saviour at Berestove was also destroyed by Batu Khan in 1240.

All additions to the Piatnytska Church were destroyed by a Nazi bomb in 1941.

It is also part of our history. We can say "regretfully", but it is important to draw the right conclusion.

We are always building something. Sometimes someone is fascinated by it, sometimes someone captures it. But we always come back and always get it back.

And today we must jointly strive for one thing: not to lose what is built, to restore what is destroyed, to return what is captured. And to save all this forever together.

And therefore - to save ourselves and the state.

Let’s remember the past, act today and think about the future.

I really want the time to come when the meetings of the National Security and Defense Council will be held not once a week, but once a year. And the agenda of these meetings will contain only one item - nobody and nothing threatens Ukraine.

It is for this purpose that we continue our daily work, active defense of our state and restoration of justice. And the various "nobody" and "nothing", which have been inflicting great losses and painful blows on the country for years, receive great troubles and painful sanctions in return.

In continuation of the movement on this path, a regular meeting of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine took place today. Among the number of issues discussed at it, I want to highlight a few most important, in my opinion.

First of all, these are the results of the implementation of previous decisions of the National Security and Defense Council, namely, sanctions against thieves in law and crime bosses. In three weeks, charges were brought against six thieves in law. Twelve were deported from Ukraine. Others are in custody and isolated from the outside world. That is, we managed to achieve virtually zero influence of thieves in law on the criminogenic situation in Ukraine. In addition, after the sanctions of the National Security and Defense Council, 111 ethnic crime bosses terminated their criminal influence. One third was deported from Ukraine. Others are awaiting the completion of the deportation procedure or are under investigation. The documents for residence in Ukraine of the rest of them were abolished. And this is the case when I am not at all upset by the fact that someone is emigrating from Ukraine forever.

Also today we discussed the problematic issues of citizens living in rural areas. Namely, in the villages of Koncha-Zaspa and Pushcha-Vodytsya, where the biggest problem is the use of state-owned facilities by unknown persons for unknown reasons.

At the last meeting of the National Security and Defense Council, I commissioned to conduct an audit of all state lands and buildings, as well as to establish a complete list of their inhabitants.

Today we heard the first results: in the near future, the first twenty people, including former ministers, prosecutors general and other high-ranking officials, will be evicted from state buildings. I want to emphasize - these twenty people are the first to leave but not the last.

And the most important issue of both this meeting and this week is the law on oligarchs.

First of all, I want to say: I didn't expect that there are so many experts on de-oligarchization in our country. If we knew, we would invite them to draft a bill. But, unfortunately, all of them for some reason have been concealing this knowledge for the previous 30 years. And none of the politicians, including those of the highest level, has ever raised the issue of oligarchs. Probably because talking a lot about yourself is impolite and immodest.

Secondly, I am grateful to all the critics of the law. Your remarks are valuable: you have been working with oligarchs for many years, either for oligarchs or under oligarchs, and therefore, you clearly understand all the shortcomings of the law, being, as they say, deep in the material.

And I would like to address separately the employers of all these independent experts and critics. As business sharks, you should have keen senses. Surprisingly, you do not feel that the country has changed and is starting a new story. Under the new rules. Not even so. Simply - by the rules.

You can accept them. Be a big, transparent business with the help of the state, not at the expense of the state. A business that pays taxes, not kickbacks. That finances charitable projects, not a group of deputies. That increases its capital not because it divides and takes away from the country.

Everyone who is ready to work only this way is welcome.

And those who do not want to live and work according to the new and fair rules of the game will be out of the game.

I will have one question for those who will try to rock the boat, persuade, break or reach an agreement with MPs on this law. This is a question about the status of oligarchs, which will be put to an all-Ukrainian referendum. This question will be the first. And for someone, perhaps the last.

I also want to say that this bill is only the first step. This is the creation of a foundation for counteracting oligarchic influence.

You can't own deputies, ministers and any other officials. This bill is the first decision in all 30 years of independence that demonstrates our attitude to the oligarchic system. It claims: yes, there are oligarchs in Ukraine. Yes, they influence politics. And, yes - it will not happen again.

Our strong people of our indomitable country!

The 24th day of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine is over. After eight years of aggression. Ukrainians have proved that they know how to fight more professionally than an army that has been fighting for decades in different regions and under different conditions. We respond with wisdom and courage to the huge number of their equipment and soldiers sent to Ukraine.

That is why, for example, the Ukrainian Chornobaivka will go down in war history. This is a place where the Russian military and their commanders have shown themselves completely as they are: incompetent, capable of simply driving their people to slaughter. Six times our military destroyed the occupiers near Chornobaivka. Six times! And they still come there.

The besieged Mariupol will go down in history of responsibility for war crimes. The terror the occupiers did to the peaceful city will be remembered for centuries to come. And the more Ukrainians tell the world about it, the more support we find. The more Russia uses terror against Ukraine, the worse the consequences will be for it.

Today I addressed the people of Switzerland.

This is a special state. It does not elbow its way on the international stage. But when it speaks its word, it is heard by absolutely everyone. Switzerland has backed European Union sanctions against Russia. This means a lot for the Russian state machine. For people who are used to the fact that power is money. Hence, banks. Hence, Switzerland and other countries that help save capital. I am grateful to the President and to the people of Switzerland and to their country for their sincere support in our struggle for life and liberty. For not staying away. And I urged them to take a few more steps.

So that all Swiss companies that have not yet left the Russian market do so immediately in order not to give a single dollar, franc or euro to a Russian military machine to kill our people.

So that all those responsible for the war against our state cannot enjoy life in Switzerland, real estate in Switzerland, banks in Switzerland.

Our Armed Forces continue to deter the enemy in all major areas. Inflict unprecedented losses on Russian troops. Some units of the occupiers were destroyed by 80-90%.

In places of especially fierce battles, the frontline of our defense is simply piled with the corpses of Russian soldiers. And these corpses, these bodies, are not taken away. New units are driven on the offensive through these bodies. Some reserves that the command of the Russian troops collect wherever they can.

We are well aware that Russia has just a bottomless human resource and a lot of equipment, missiles and bombs.

But I want to ask the citizens of Russia. What have they done to you over the years that you stopped noticing your losses?

Do the words “son”, “mother”, “father” mean nothing to you anymore?

Already more than 14 thousand of your soldiers have been killed. This is 14 thousand mothers. This is 14 thousand fathers. These are wives, these are children, relatives and friends. And you don't notice it? But there will only be more victims. As long as this war continues. Your war against us, Russia against Ukraine. On our land.

Eight humanitarian corridors worked on Saturday. 6623 people were rescued.

Due to the shelling of the occupiers, we were unable to rescue people from Borodyanka, Kyiv region. But we will not abandon these attempts.

Ukrainians were evacuated from Bervytsya, Bucha, and Bohdanivka to Brovary.

People were taken to Bakhmut from Lysychansk, Popasna, Severodonetsk, and Rubizhne in the Luhansk region.

More than 4000 Mariupol residents managed to leave for Zaporizhzhia.

Unfortunately, it was not possible to deliver the humanitarian cargo to the cities of the Kherson region. Russian troops blocked the movement of our convoy. Why? Their goal has not changed - in the same way they try to portray in their propaganda that Ukraine has left its citizens without the essentials. As if Russia is constantly saving them from something.

Although on February 23 our Kherson residents had more than the regions of Russia itself.

I spoke today with French President Macron. About our interaction. About finding a solution for peace, for the liberation of our territories. To save our people.

I am sure you understand that negotiations are not easy and pleasant. But they are needed. Because it's about life.

Ukraine has always sought a peaceful solution. The more we are interested in peace now.

Because we count everyone killed. Because every ruined family, every ruined house matters to us. Because we are Ukrainians, and for us a person is priceless.

Today I signed a decree on awarding 161 of our defenders with state awards of Ukraine. 40 of them posthumously. And the decree on awarding the title of Hero of Ukraine to 12 servicemen. 8 of them posthumously.

I also met with warriors of the special unit of the National Police of Ukraine KORD to award them. I thanked them for their service, for the protection of our peaceful cities and for their help to the army.

In total, during the days of the full-scale war, 70 of our defenders have already been awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine. 2180 Ukrainians were awarded orders and medals for courage, for saving brothers-in-arms and civilians, for effective actions in defense of the state.

I am sure I can say on behalf of all our Ukrainian people: we are sincerely grateful to each of you. To each and everyone who defends our state and stops the army of occupiers, which was called one of the few most powerful in the world.

Ukrainian poet Lina Kostenko celebrates her birthday on March 19. I sincerely congratulate you. On behalf of all Ukrainians.

And let me remind you today her words:

[Quotes Lina Kostenko’s poem]

In fact, each of us has a nation. And we should not think meanly. Especially those whom Ukrainians have given the right to be politicians.

I want to remind all politicians from any camp: wartime shows very well the meanness of personal ambitions of those who try to put their own ambitions, their own party or career above the interests of the state, the interests of the people.

Those who hide somewhere in the rear, but pretend to be the only one who cares about defense.

Any activity of politicians aimed at splitting or collaborating will not succeed. But it will get a tough response.

That is why the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine decided… Given the full-scale war waged by the Russian Federation and the ties of some political structures with this state, any activity of a number of political parties during the martial law is suspended. Namely: "Opposition Platform - For Life", "Shariy Party", "Nashi", "Opposition Bloc", "Left Opposition", "Union of Left Forces", "State", "Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine", "Socialist Party of Ukraine”, “Socialists” Party, “Volodymyr Saldo Bloc”.

The Ministry of Justice is instructed to immediately take comprehensive measures to ban the activities of these political parties in the prescribed manner.

Everyone must now take care of the interests of our state, the interests of Ukraine.

Because it's for us.

Because it is for the sake of life.

My greetings to all Swiss friends of Ukraine! To all your beautiful people, the people of Switzerland!

I am grateful to you for supporting our people.

Thank you for defending freedom together with all those who value it.

This is very important now. Nowadays. At a special time period.

And especially important - from you.

When terror became the national idea of one of the largest nations in the world. The basis of their foreign policy.

When the crimes of terrorism are committed not by some outcast or group of persons and not by an organization, but by the state. Which has a nuclear arsenal.

When a permanent member of the UN Security Council deliberately destroys everything for which the UN was built. Having unleashed a cruel, bloody, senseless war against us.

But we now have a chance. A chance to show not only to Russia, but also to any aggressor in the world, any terrorist state, that war will destroy not the victim, but the one who came with it.

And, perhaps, this is the last chance for humanity - to stop the wars. Stop the state terror.

And I'm telling you now. Switzerland. A state that has a very long history of peace. And an even longer history of influence. In many areas - a decisive influence on the world.

Even before I became President, I was thinking what life of our beloved Ukrainians I would like to see.

I have often been to your country. And I know very well how you live. And one day, standing near Chillon Castle, I asked my friends - we were one company - why can't we live like this?

To have such a standard of living. A high level. And with the same freedom. In such friendly communities. And with such confidence in our own strength.

And I sincerely wanted the Ukrainians to live like the Swiss. So that we can jointly decide everything about our own lives. About our land. Not expecting anything from politicians, unnecessary words, but voting in a referendum.

So that we can be sure, despite all the financial crises in the world, that our state will withstand and remain a leader. A leader of trust, a leader of stability. A dream for all people. Successful, not very successful - no matter what level, just for all people.

So that the Ukrainians, like the Swiss, can feel that they live in real communities that care about what is common to all - for the good of all.

Maybe these are all ordinary things to you. For us, these are reforms. And this is the path we are taking and we wanted to take.

And we passed the relevant laws. For all this to work. We gave opportunities. Opportunities for our people.

So that we gradually reach your standard of living.

And we did it until the black day. February 24. The day of the beginning of the full-scale Russian invasion of our land, Ukraine.

And then everything changed.

It has changed for each of us, Ukrainians. I'm sure it has changed for all Europeans. And it has changed for all world democracies.

It has changed for you, too.

I am grateful to you and your state for supporting us in such a difficult time. I am thankful that you did not stay away, didn't say that it wasn't related to you at all

Because, in fact, it is impossible to stay away from the fact that in the 21st century, in the heart of Europe, hundreds of rockets and bombs are flying at peaceful cities.

It is impossible to stay away when the army of the world's largest state, albeit only in size, directs all its deadly potential to destroy us, to destroy hospitals, ordinary schools, churches, universities, maternity hospitals, residential areas.

It is impossible to be indifferent when children are killed. As of this morning, the Russian army has killed 112 Ukrainian children.

And just as I wanted the Ukrainians to live like the Swiss... I also want you to be and become like the Ukrainians. In the fight against evil.

So that there is no question about banks. About your banks. Where the money of all those who started this war is kept.

It's painful and it's hard. But it is also a struggle against evil.

It is necessary to completely freeze all the assets of these people and their accounts. It's a big fight, and you can do it.

I want you to become Ukrainians who feel what it is like when whole cities are destroyed, peaceful cities. Destroyed on the orders of those who like to live in communities - different, European, in your communities, in beautiful Swiss communities.

Who enjoys real estate in your country.

And it would be fair to deprive them of this privilege. To deprive of what they are taking from us.

And I want you to be as Ukrainians in the issue of business. Business that works in Russia in spite of everything. Despite this war.

Despite all our murdered children. Despite the people killed. Despite the destroyed cities. Like our city of Mariupol, heroic Mariupol, which has been under complete blockade for weeks. Imagine - no food, no water, no electricity. Just under the bombs.

"Good food. Good life." This is the slogan of Nestlé. Your company that refuses to leave Russia. Even now - when there are threats from Russia to other European countries. Not only to us. When there is even nuclear blackmail from Russia.

And I want all of you, Swiss people, to become like all of us, Ukrainians. I want us not to lose our common chance now.

A chance to restore peace, a chance to stop any wars in the world. Because when Switzerland is with you, you are definitely successful. Because when Ukraine is with you, you are definitely strong.

Last year we agreed on a big conference with the President of your country. Conference in Lugano. For the sake of economic transformation, for the sake of Ukraine's reforms.

It was to take place this July. As well as the next summit of the first ladies and gentlemen.

And I believe, I know we can hold them. This year. On your land.

For the restoration and development of Ukraine. So that you have the opportunity to show again and again all the best that is in your hearts. In our hearts.

In the hearts of all those people who are fighting for freedom and fighting for life.

I am grateful to you. I am grateful to Switzerland!

Usually on such days we used to say: “Spring has come”.

But now we are saying: “War has come”.

But we will definitely defeat everyone no matter what. Because we are free people of a free country.

Today, government officials have elaborated the decision to fully reboot the customs service.

Cargo for our defense, for our people will be brought into Ukraine as easily as the physics laws allow that.

We eliminate the whole bureaucracy, all paperwork, VAT, all customs duties.

The goal is clear - to prevent the human factor from hindering the speedy supply of goods, which are really needed now.

Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine Ruslan Stefanchuk and profile committees are working to ensure the support of people’s deputies for the innovations. I emphasize: this decision is necessary for the defense of the state, for ensuring normal life during martial law.

I urge certain MPs not to speculate on this issue, as it is for the benefit of our state, not the government or the opposition. We must all work jointly for the sake of our Ukraine, our people. Let’s think about PR after the victory.

Another important area of government work is helping Ukrainians who have been forced to flee their homes due to hostilities.

I commissioned the Cabinet of Ministers to develop a comprehensive program to support such people, our citizens. Everyone who was deprived of home because of the war. We already have the outlines of this program. The first component is financial. State support for all displaced persons. Adults and children. Government support for jobs for such people - where they are temporarily staying. So that every person, every family has a basis for life.

The second component is housing. The government is preparing concrete proposals for housing for IDPs right now. And also organizes the reconstruction of destroyed housing after the war.

The third component is no less important. This is the support for the families who have housed people from areas of hostilities or temporary occupation. At a minimum, they will be reimbursed for the cost of utilities related to the stay of IDPs.

Prime Minister of Ukraine Denys Shmyhal will soon explain all the details of such a comprehensive program to support our citizens.

A coordination headquarters has been set up to regulate all issues related to the delivery of humanitarian aid to Ukraine. Under the chairmanship of Head of the Office of the President Andriy Yermak, a meeting was held with Ukrainian ambassadors to intensify the supply of humanitarian goods to Ukraine, primarily to help internally displaced persons.

I also commissioned the government to provide assistance together with the International Committee of the Red Cross to those of our citizens who found themselves abroad after February 24 and need the attention of our state and international organizations.

Today there were seven humanitarian corridors in Ukraine. Six - in the Sumy region, one - in the Donetsk region. More than 9,000 people were evacuated from the besieged Mariupol. In total, more than 180,000 Ukrainians have been rescued by the humanitarian corridors. Hundreds of tons of essential products were delivered.

But the occupiers continue to block the supply of humanitarian aid to the besieged cities in most areas. This is a totally deliberate tactic. They have a clear order to do absolutely everything to make the humanitarian catastrophe in Ukrainian cities an "argument" for Ukrainians to cooperate with the occupiers.

This is a war crime. They will be held accountable for this. 100%. Every Russian figure who gives such orders and every Russian soldier who carries out such orders will be identified. And will receive a compulsory one-way ticket to The Hague. To the city where the International Criminal Court is located.

People are being rescued from the rubble of the drama theater destroyed by the occupiers in Mariupol, where civilians had been hiding from Russian shelling and bombs. More than 130 people are already on the surface. Some of them are seriously wounded. But at the moment there is no information about the dead.

Thanks to the courage and professional training of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, the occupation forces were stopped in almost all directions.

Heavy fighting in the Kharkiv region - especially heavy near Izyum. Russian troops have already thrown people from training centers there. Absolutely unprepared contingent. People who can't endure half an hour in battle.

Kyiv region, Sumy region, Chernihiv region, the south of our state - the army stopped the occupiers. The initial plan of the Russian military to seize our state failed. And it seems that they do not know what else can be done to us. It seems that their military commanders are not able to offer their political leadership anything but cruel and erroneous tactics to exhaust us, to exhaust Ukraine. Nothing but constant strikes at the civilian population, peaceful cities, people, children, missiles, air bombs, shelling from "Grads", "Uragans". Nothing but the destruction of non-military infrastructure - residential buildings, hospitals, schools, churches.

But this tactic of their military only worsens the situation for the Russian state. Leads to new and new destructive sanctions. Encourages new members to join our anti-war coalition. It allows us to unite even those states that have always tried to remain neutral to put pressure on Russia.

Therefore, negotiations on peace, on security for us, for Ukraine - meaningful, fair and without delay - are the only chance for Russia to reduce the damage from its own mistakes.

We have always insisted on negotiations. We have always offered dialogue, offered solutions for peace. Not only during 23 days of invasion.

And I want everyone to hear me now, especially in Moscow. It's time to meet. Time to talk. It is time to restore territorial integrity and justice for Ukraine. Otherwise, Russia's losses will be so huge that several generations will not be enough to rebound.

Many words were heard in Moscow today in connection with the anniversary of the seizure of Crimea. A big rally took place. And I want to pay attention to one detail. It is reported that a total of about 200,000 people were involved in the rally in the Russian capital. 100,000 on the streets, about 95,000 at the stadium.

Approximately the same number of Russian troops were involved in the invasion of Ukraine.

Just imagine 14 thousand corpses and tens of thousands of wounded and maimed people at that stadium in Moscow. There are already so many Russian losses as a result of this invasion.

This is the price of war. In a little more than three weeks. The war must end.

Ukraine's proposals are on the table.

In the coming days, I will continue to appeal to the nations of the world to call for peace for Ukraine. My appeal to the Swiss people is ahead, to the people and to the state.

Appeals to Israel, Italy and Japan are also planned. The world hears Ukraine's position. The world supports our defenders, defenders of Ukraine.

Today I want to express my sincere gratitude to each defender of our strong Mariupol. Our heroic city, which is experiencing the greatest ordeal in its history, in the history of Ukraine.

36th Separate Marine Brigade.

501st Separate Marine Battalion.

1st Separate Marine Battalion.

12th Brigade of the National Guard.

And a separate detachment of special purpose "Azov".

I am grateful to each and every one of our defenders of Mariupol. I am grateful to everyone who defends Ukraine.

Also at the request of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine I decided to confer the title of Hero of Ukraine upon:

Colonel Baranyuk Volodymyr Anatoliyovych, Commander of the 36th Separate Marine Brigade.

And Major Prokopenko Denys Hennadiyovych, Commander of a separate detachment of special purpose "Azov". For courage, for effective actions to repel enemy attacks, for the defense of the hero city of Mariupol.

Strong people of the indomitable country!

The 23rd day of our patriotic war continues. After eight years of war in the east.

The occupiers do not stop burning their national wealth in the war against Ukraine.

I am confident that by attacking us, they will destroy everything that Russian society has achieved over the past 25 years. And they will return to where they once began to rise from, as they say, to the "the wicked 90's". But without freedom, without the creative desire of millions of people to work for the development of their state.

This will be the price of war against Ukraine for Russia.

It will be a fall for them, a painful fall. And they will feel it even in spite of the "opium for the people" from television propagandists.

Unjust and aggressive war always has a high price for the aggressor.

But no matter what happens to them, it cannot comfort us. It will not resurrect our dead people. It will not restore our cities. It will not heal the emotional wound that will stay with us forever.

We will rebuild everything - I have no doubt about that. We will become a full member of the EU - each representative of our state works for this 24/7.

But life will be different, and for many - without the thousands of hearts stopped by this war.

May the memory of everyone who gave life for Ukraine live forever!

Russian troops have continued treacherous shelling of our peaceful cities and our communities. Lviv, Kyiv and the region, Zhytomyr region, Sumy region, Kharkiv and the region, Chernihiv, cities of Donbas - Severodonetsk, Kramatorsk, our Mariupol... Missile strikes, air bombs, "Grads".

We are shooting down Russian missiles as much as we can. We are destroying their planes and helicopters. And this despite the fact that we do not yet have adequate anti-missile weapons. Advanced weapons. We do not have enough combat aircraft. But we have a goal, pure and fair - to protect our people, our state.

Undoubtedly, we will continue to do everything we can. We will remind some Western leaders even louder that this will be a moral defeat for them, it will destroy their prestige if Ukraine does not receive advanced weapons that will really save the lives of thousands of our people.

Russian missiles will not fall from shotguns, which some are trying to replace really useful supplies with.

Today is a busy day of negotiations for me. Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission. Charles Michel, President of the European Council. Ukraine's great friend, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Johnson.

The subject is clear. First, these are concrete steps that will give Ukraine even more strength, not only directly for the defense, but also for the economy. For our people, for Ukrainians who really defend Europe. Here and now. On our land.

President Ursula von der Leyen has promised to do everything possible to speed up Ukraine's accession to the EU. We reduce bureaucratic processes for our state, which usually take years, to weeks, to months. It's not easy, but we do it. I am sure.

We also agreed on the EU’s support for Ukrainians who were forced to flee their homes due to the war. For those who are abroad and within our state.

We agreed on a new macro-financial aid - another 300 million euros for Ukraine. In addition to those on which a decision has already been made.

Secondly, we are discussing the next package of sanctions against Russia. Significant enough. To make them feel that every missile against our state, every bomb, every shot has its price. For the Russian budget, for Russian companies, for Russian ambitions and for specific people who represent the Russian government.

And until there is peace for Ukraine, sanctions against Russia must grow steadily.

I am grateful to all public initiatives from around the world that offer restrictions for Russia not only at the state level, but also at the level of societies. In particular, I am grateful to the Swedish Port Workers' Union, which promises not to service vessels connected with Russia. This is right. This is a good example for all public structures, all trade unions and business associations to follow.

If Russia is not stopped now, if Russia is not punished now, other aggressors in the world will start other wars. In different regions of the world. On different continents. Wherever a state dreams of conquering its neighbors.

We need to act now so that all other potential aggressors see that war is only a loss and no benefit.

That is why it is necessary for all Europeans to block ports for all Russian ships. So that all Russian commercial vessels follow the Russian warship.

It is necessary that all Western companies leave the Russian market and not cover with cheap PR their thirst for profit despite blood, despite war crimes. Like Nestle or Auchan for example.

To date, humanitarian corridors in the Sumy, Donetsk and Kharkiv regions have been agreed upon. Sumy, Konotop, Trostyanets, Lebedyn, Krasnopillya, Velyka Pysarivka. It is especially difficult from the besieged Mariupol to Zaporizhzhia. The occupiers are doing everything to complicate the movement of people and prevent Ukrainian humanitarian cargo from entering the city. This is outright terror. But we try, we do our best. More than 35,000 people have already been rescued from Mariupol.

Rescue work is underway at the site of the bombing by the occupiers of the theater where Mariupol residents hid from shelling, used it as a shelter.

It is known that as of now, more than 130 people were rescued. But hundreds of Mariupol residents are still under the debris. Despite the shelling, despite all the difficulties, we will continue rescue work.

The situation in the Kharkiv region is very difficult. The occupiers do not stop trying to destroy our city of Izyum. People in Balakliya are being tortured. Our team is doing everything to organize a working humanitarian corridor to these cities and deliver food, water and medicine.

I instructed the Cabinet of Ministers, the Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council and the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada to develop a format of decisions that will speed up the supply of all necessary goods from abroad.

This is especially topical for food, fuel and other goods that meet the basic needs of society.

War is not a time for bureaucrats and careerists from different departments to complicate the provision of goods for people. We want to simplify the passage of goods that Ukrainians need now through customs as much as possible.

If this requires the removal of taxes and excises during martial law, we are ready to do so. If it is necessary to remove customs officers who do not understand the tasks of wartime to act quickly, we will do so.

Our borders must be open to everything Ukrainians need. I am waiting for the appropriate decisions by the end of the day. And then - the support from people's deputies.

Because now everyone has to work only for Ukrainians, only for our state, for defense. Not for ambitions. Not for fear. Not for bureaucracy.

Everything is for the protection of Ukraine!

Today I signed a decree on the awarding of state awards to 138 servicemen of the Armed Forces. In particular, the Order of Bohdan Khmelnytsky of the II degree is awarded to:

Syrskyi Oleksandr Stanislavovych, Commander of the Land Forces. Since the beginning of the full-scale Russian invasion, he has been leading the defense of Kyiv. Thanks to his professional and courageous actions, the enemy suffered significant losses and was driven away from the capital. During the defense of Kyiv, more than 30 settlements in the Kyiv region, which were temporarily occupied by the enemy, were liberated.

Major Mazurok Taras Leonidovych, commander of the tank battalion. Defending the Donetsk region, he inflicted significant losses on the enemy and significantly stopped his advance.

Sergeant Nutsa Ruslana Vasylivna was awarded the Order of Courage of the III degree. Senior combat medic. She personally took part in the evacuation of the wounded from Vodyane, Shyrokyne and Mariupol. Thanks to her actions, 31 of our defenders were saved. She continues to perform tasks in Mariupol.

The 22nd day of our struggle, our defense against one of the world's largest armies is over. Which we make smaller every day. Every day. But it still has numbers, equipment and reserves.

We have information that the Russian military is recruiting mercenaries from other countries, trying to deceive as many young people as possible into military service.

We know that this will not help them.

So now I warn everyone who will try to join the occupiers on our Ukrainian land. This will be the worst decision of your life.

Long life is better than the money you are offered for a short one.

Our courageous defenders continue to hold all the key areas that the enemy is pressing. And respond to every attack. To every blow of the occupiers to our peaceful cities, to our people. New Russian conscripts have been taken prisoner.

Among them are those who refuse to return to Russia. And there are many who are not even mentioned in Russia. They don't even try to take them back.

Their death notifications have been sent to their families although they are in captivity and alive.

All Russians who can hear me now, speak about it. Tell it in Russia.

Every mother who knows that her son was sent to war against Ukraine must check where her son is. And especially those who cannot contact their children, who have been told that their children had been killed. And who didn't receive the bodies. There are phone numbers on the Internet that you can call and find out what is really happening to your children.

We did not plan to take thousands of prisoners. We do not need 13 or any number of thousands of dead Russian soldiers. We do not need it. We didn't want this war. We only want peace. And we want you to love your children more than you fear your authorities.

I addressed the parliament of Germany today. One of the most influential countries in the world. In Europe. One of the natural leaders of the European continent.

I spoke not just as President, but as a Ukrainian citizen. As a European. As someone who has felt for many years that the German state seems to have fenced itself off us with a wall. Invisible yet solid wall.

We have seen Germany fight for the economy for decades. For new Russian gas pipelines and old European dreams. Dreams of some kind of cooperation that Russia has not taken seriously for a long time.

We see that the views of the Germans are changing. And this is very important. We see Germany looking for a new path. We see how sincerely the majority of Germans stand in favor of revising the old policy.

We see that Chancellor Olaf Scholz has a great chance, a great mission - to give Germany a renewed leadership. Give Europe peace. Long-lasting and most importantly - fair. One that guarantees security to every state in Europe and Ukraine in the first place. And I sincerely wish Chancellor Scholz from all Ukrainians, from all Europeans that Germany and its partners succeed in carrying out this mission.

I will continue such speeches in the parliaments and squares of the partner states. Necessarily. As much as it takes to stop the war. To restore our territorial integrity. To return to all of us, Ukrainians and all Europeans, the long-awaited peace.

I feel that we are being increasingly understood. In Europe, in the world, in different countries. And it gives us more and more support. The one we have been asking for for so long.

I spoke with French President Macron. We are strengthening the defense of Ukraine. We coordinated our joint steps towards peace. I’m grateful for that.

I am also grateful to President Biden for his new and effective support for our country. Please, understand: I can't reveal all the details of this support package and others to you. Because this is our tactic. Our defense. When the enemy does not know what to expect from us. Just as they did not know what would await them after February 24. Didn't know what we had for the defense and how we were preparing to face the attack.

The occupiers thought they were going to Ukraine, which they had seen before, in 2014-2015. Which they constantly corrupted and which they were not afraid of. But we are different.

And this allows us to defend ourselves against a full-scale strike for 22 days already. Everything we have done in a few years. For our defense. For our tactics. For defense tactics, which is not the time to reveal while the war is going on.

It is not the time to reveal our tactics of negotiations as well. Negotiations for peace, sovereignty, territorial integrity of our state, our freedom. Working more in silence than on television, radio or Facebook. I think this is right.

Today I visited the wonderful Vlasenko family from Vorzel, Kyiv region, at the hospital.

Escaping, they got under Russian shelling. The eldest daughter, Katya, who is only 16 years old, covered her brother Ihor, who is 8. The brother got out of the car and cursed the occupiers. Tetiana, mother, received shrapnel wounds. The father carried his daughter in his arms.

Thank God they all survived. Because they stayed together, as a family, and defended each other. I was really moved to talk to them. Probably the most during this war. I sincerely wish health and happiness to this family, the Vlasenko family. Like all other families. I wish you peace and work for it.

Also today, I awarded five employees of the State Emergency Service with the Order of Courage. Everyone is a hero. Everyone was awarded for selfless actions, for dedication with which they save all of us, save Ukrainians.

And some more news, very important and, of course, positive. About our economy. About how we bring our country back to life. Right now, wherever security allows. Wherever business can run.

Our government has already prepared a decision to expand the lending program for entrepreneurs on the basis of the program "5-7-9%" creating a new opportunity. Any business will be able to get a loan at 0%. For the time of martial law plus 1 month after the war.

Then there will be a minimum rate of 5%. And the total loan amount can be up to 60 million hryvnias. So that a wider range of businesses can take advantage of our program.

The second news is that the Cabinet of Ministers will vote tomorrow for a large-scale reduction of regulations.

There were more than 600 permits and licenses for business, and about 20 remain mandatory. Only those that simply cannot be revoked. For example, radioactive waste management.

So, for the vast majority of businesses in Ukraine, the declarative principle will work: you have announced the start of business and you work freely.

And the third news, which concerns millions of Ukrainians. This is a special task for the National Bank of Ukraine, for people's deputies and our government officials.

I instructed to find such a legislative opportunity for the state to guarantee 100% of deposits in Ukrainian banks. 100%. Not part, as now, as always, but 100%.

The whole deposit. In any bank of our state. So that people do not lose money and are not afraid of it under any circumstances.

So I'm waiting for specifics. Draft decision. And I hope that the Verkhovna Rada will not delay the support.

Because Ukrainians need it. Ukraine needs this.

And finally.

Our Mariupol, our Kharkiv, our Chernihiv, Kyiv region, Izyum and all our hero cities. Which are in a very difficult situation. Extremely difficult.

We are doing everything. All of us. Absolutely.

Our army, police, SES, humanitarian convoys, church... All our people.

We will not leave you. And we will not forgive them.

You will be free. Definitely. I know it. Like all of us on our land

I am addressing you after three weeks of full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine, after eight years of war in the east of my country, in Donbas.

I appeal to you when Russia is bombing our cities, destroying everything in Ukraine. Everything - houses, hospitals, schools, churches. Using missiles, air bombs, rocket artillery.

Thousands of Ukrainians died in three weeks. The occupiers killed 108 children. In the middle of Europe, in our country, in 2022.

I am addressing you after numerous meetings, negotiations, statements and requests. After steps in support, some of which are overdue. After sanctions, which are obviously not enough to stop this war. And after we saw how many ties your companies still have with Russia. With a state that just uses you and some other countries to finance the war.

During the three weeks of war for our lives, for our freedom, we became convinced of what we had felt before. And what you probably do not all notice yet.

You are like behind the wall again. Not the Berlin Wall. But in the middle of Europe. Between freedom and slavery. And this wall grows stronger with each bomb that falls on our land, on Ukraine. With every decision that is not made for the sake of peace. Not approved by you, although it may help.

When did it happen?

Dear politicians.

Dear German people.

Why is this possible? When we told you that Nord Stream was a weapon and a preparation for a great war, we heard in response that it was an economy after all. Economy. Economy. But it was cement for a new wall.

When we asked you what Ukraine needs to do to become a member of NATO, to be safe, to receive security guarantees, we heard the answer: such a decision is not on the table yet and will not be in the near future. Just as the chair for us at this table. Just as you are still delaying the issue of Ukraine's accession to the European Union. Frankly, for some it is politics. The truth is that it is stones. Stones for a new wall.

When we asked for preventive sanctions, we appealed to Europe, we appealed to many countries. We turned to you. Sanctions for the aggressor to feel that you are a force. We saw delays. We felt resistance. We understood that you want to continue the economy. Economy. Economy.

And now the trade routes between you and the country that has once again brought a brutal war to Europe are barbed wire over the wall. Over the new wall that divides Europe.

And you don't see what's behind this wall, and it's between us, between people in Europe. And because of this, not everyone is fully aware of what we are going through today.

I am addressing you on behalf of Ukrainians, I am addressing you on behalf of Mariupol residents - civilians of a city that Russian troops have blocked and razed to the ground. They just destroy everything there. Everything and everyone who is there. Hundreds of thousands of people are under shelling around the clock. No food, 24 hours a day without water, no electricity, 24 hours a day without communication. For weeks.

Russian troops do not distinguish between civilians and military. They don’t care where civilian objects are, everything is considered a target.

A theater that was a shelter for hundreds of people and was blown up yesterday, a maternity hospital, a children's hospital, residential areas without any military facilities - they are destroying everything. Round the clock. And they do not let any humanitarian cargo into our blocked city. For five days, Russian troops have not stopped the shelling specifically to prevent the rescue of our people.

You can see it all. If you climb over this Wall.

If you remember what the Berlin Airlift meant to you. Which could be realized because the sky was safe. You were not killed from the sky as now in our country, when we cannot even make an airlift! When the sky gives only Russian missiles and air bombs.

I am addressing you on behalf of older Ukrainians. Many survivors of World War II. Those who escaped during the occupation 80 years ago. Those who survived Babyn Yar.

Babyn Yar that President Steinmeier visited last year. On the 80th anniversary of the tragedy. And that was hit by Russian missiles now. It is exactly this place that was hit. And the missile strike killed the family that went to Babyn Yar, to the monument. Killed again, 80 years after.

I appeal to you on behalf of everyone who has heard politicians say: "Never again." And who saw that these words are worthless. Because again in Europe they are trying to destroy the whole nation. Destroy everything we live by and live for.

I am addressing you on behalf of our military. Those who defend our state, and therefore the values that are often talked about everywhere in Europe, everywhere - and in Germany as well.

Freedom and equality. Opportunity to live freely, not to submit to another state, which considers a foreign land its "living space". Why are they defending all this without your leadership? Without your strength? Why are overseas states closer to us than you are?

Because this is the Wall. The wall that someone doesn't notice and that we are hammering on while fighting to save our people.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

German people!

I am grateful to everyone who supports us. I am grateful to you. Ordinary Germans who sincerely help Ukrainians on your land. To journalists who do their job honestly, showing all the evil that Russia has brought to us. I am grateful to the German businessmen who put morality and humanity above accounting. Above the economy. Economy. Economy. And I am grateful to the politicians who are still trying... Trying to break this Wall. Who choose life between Russian money and the deaths of Ukrainian children. Who support the strengthening of sanctions against Russia that can guarantee peace. Peace to Ukraine. Peace to Europe. Who do not hesitate to disconnect Russia from SWIFT.

Who know that an embargo on trade with Russia is needed. On imports of everything that sponsors this war. Who know that Ukraine will be in the European Union. Because Ukraine is already more Europe than many others.

I am grateful to everyone who is taller than any wall. And who knows that the stronger one bears more responsibility when it comes to saving people.

It is difficult for us to endure without the help of the world, without your help. It is difficult to defend Ukraine, Europe without what you can do. So that you don’t look over your shoulder even after this war. After the destruction of Kharkiv... For the second time in 80 years. After the bombing of Chernihiv, Sumy and Donbas. For the second time in 80 years. After thousands of people tortured and killed. For the second time in 80 years. Otherwise, what is the historical responsibility to the Ukrainian people still not redeemed for what happened 80 years ago?

And now - so that a new one does not appear, behind the new Wall, which will again demand redemption.

I appeal to you and remind you of what is needed. The things without which Europe will not survive and will not preserve its values.

Former actor, President of the United States Ronald Reagan once said in Berlin: Tear down this wall!

And I want to tell you now.

Chancellor Scholz! Tear down this wall.

Give Germany the leadership you deserve. And what your descendants will be proud of.

Support us.

Support peace.

Support every Ukrainian.

Stop the war.

Help us stop it.

We have finally managed to release the mayor of Melitopol from captivity. Our Ukrainian Melitopol, which did not submit and will not submit to the occupiers. Ivan Fedorov is free. I talked to him today. The Russian military abducted him on March 11, trying to persuade him to collaborate. But our man withstood. He did not give up. Just as we all endure. You all. Just as we all do not give up. Because we are Ukrainians. And we always protect our own.

Today a protest action took place in Berdyansk again. Protest against the occupiers from the Russian Federation. Thousands of brave civilians came out against the armed Russian military. And they told them everything, everything they deserve. It is very important.

I know it's hard. But it is also important that what they heard from our people, including in Russian, is clear and unambiguous: occupiers, go home.

There is still such an opportunity. Every soldier thrown into the territory of our country has such an opportunity. Everyone who has not yet been killed, wounded or taken prisoner.

Russian troops suffer such losses in Ukraine, which were inflicted neither in Syria, nor in Chechnya. Neither did the Soviet troops suffer such losses in Afghanistan. If your war, the war against the Ukrainian people, continues, the mothers of Russia will lose more children than in the Afghan and Chechen wars combined. What’s the point of it?

Every Russian soldier who lays down weapons will get a chance, a chance to survive.

I appeal specifically to the conscripts who were thrown into the furnace of this war. Not your war. And to the rest of the Russian soldiers who still have the instinct of self-preservation.

Lay down your weapons. It's better than dying on the battlefield, on our land.

Unfortunately, the humanitarian corridors did not work on Wednesday. The Russian military did not stop shelling, did not guarantee security.

We are ready to ensure silence. We are ready to take people out and send humanitarian aid. But we can't expose people to shelling on the road. Understand us. Expose to the fact that for the Russian military there is no such war crime, which they would not commit.

We are taking away Mariupol residents who managed to escape to Berdyansk... We are taking them to Zaporizhzhia. In total, more than 6,000 Mariupol residents were transported in one day, more than 2,000 of them are children.

The Russian military tried to disrupt this movement as well. They opened mortar fire on the section of the road between Vasylivka and Kamyanske in the Zaporizhzhia region. Only by a miracle there were no casualties. Five Ukrainians were wounded, including two children.

In Chernihiv, the occupiers fired at civilians who were simply standing in line for bread. Imagine. Ten dead people.

In Mariupol, in besieged Mariupol, Russian aircraft purposefully dropped a huge bomb on the Drama Theater in the city center. Hundreds of people were hiding from the shelling there... The building was destroyed. The death toll is still unknown. Our hearts are broken by what Russia is doing to our people. To our Mariupol. To the Donetsk region...

Citizens of Russia! How is your blockade of Mariupol different from the blockade of Leningrad during World War II? Who do you inherit?

We will not forget anyone whose lives were taken by the occupiers. We will not forgive any murdered soul. Eternal memory to all victims of this terror! To all the victims of the war unleashed by the Russian state.

What else do the occupiers have to do, how many more people do they have to kill in order for Western leaders, NATO leaders to respond positively to Ukraine's request for a no-fly zone or for providing our country with the aircraft we so desperately need?

I spoke about this today in a speech to the United States Congress.

Ukraine has received strong support from our American friends. And I'm grateful to President Biden for that. I am grateful for the leadership that has united the democratic world.

But the war does not end. Russia's war crimes do not stop. The Russian economy is still able to maintain their military machine. That is why new packages of sanctions against Russia are needed. The world must finally officially recognize that Russia has become a terrorist state.

And most importantly, Ukraine needs to get more support. Even more than we get now. Air defense systems. Aircraft. Enough lethal weapons and ammunition to stop the Russian occupiers.

It was in this speech in Congress that I addressed both the United States and all the relevant states as regards creating a new U-24 union.

A new alliance that will ensure that each aggressor receives a coordinated response from the world. Fast and efficient. Immediately. Not in weeks, months, years, but in the first 24 hours after the attack.

We can no longer trust the existing institutions. We cannot expect bureaucrats in international organizations to change so quickly. Therefore, we must look for new guarantees. Create new tools. Take those who have courage and do what justice requires. We have already proved that we can do historical things. This is not just our resistance. Not just defense.

Even at this time - the biggest test for Ukraine - we managed to join the European energy network. Now Ukraine can use electricity flows from the European Union. We have been moving towards this for decades. It finally happened! I am grateful to all the power engineers of our country, to all those who worked for this result.

We are already working on programs to restore our country after the war.

I promise everyone, every Ukrainian who has lost home, who has lost an apartment as a result of hostilities or shelling that the state will restore everything. Restore independently.

I am confident that we will be able to rebuild our state quickly. Whatever the damage may be... It will be a historic reconstruction. A project that will inspire the world just as our struggle for our freedom. Just as our struggle for our Ukraine.

During the day I spoke with friends of Ukraine - President of Turkey Erdoğan and Prime Minister of Canada Trudeau. I thanked them for their support. We agreed on new steps for the sake of peace for our country.

In a conversation with the Prime Minister of Ireland, I expressed condolences over the murder by the Russian military of an Irish citizen - journalist Pierre Zakrzewski.

I also spoke with European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen. We agreed on the support for our citizens - temporary displaced persons.

I will address the German Parliament on Thursday morning. I will continue to fight for even greater support for Ukraine, for even greater pressure on Russia. For the sake of our common victory, for the sake of peace for us.

For the sake of peace for us, the Ukrainian delegation speaks with the Russian delegation. And I want all our citizens, citizens of Ukraine, to hear me now.

Negotiations are ongoing. Negotiations for the sake of Ukraine.

My priorities in the negotiations are absolutely clear: the end of the war, security guarantees, sovereignty, restoration of territorial integrity, real guarantees for our country, real protection for our country.

I am proud to greet you from Ukraine, from our capital - Kyiv. From a city that is under missile and air strikes by Russian troops. Daily. But it does not give up. And it didn't even think to give up for a single minute! Just as dozens of other cities and communities in our country, which found themselves in the worst war since World War II.

I have the honor to greet you on behalf of the Ukrainian people, brave and freedom-loving people. For eight years they have been resisting the aggression of the Russian Federation. They sacrifice the best children - sons and daughters to stop the full-scale Russian invasion.

Now the fate of our state is being decided. The fate of our people. It is being decided whether Ukrainians will be free. Whether they will preserve their democracy.

Russia has attacked more than just our land and our cities. It went on a brutal offensive against our values. Basic human values. It threw tanks and planes against our freedom. Against our right to live freely in our country, choosing our own future. Against our desire for happiness. Against our national dreams. Just like yours, ordinary people of America. Just like those of everyone in the United States.

I remember your Rushmore National Memorial. The faces of your prominent presidents. Those who laid the foundations of America. As it is today. Democracy, independence, freedom and care for everyone. Everyone who works diligently. Who lives honestly. Who respects the law.

We in Ukraine want the same for ourselves. All that is a normal part of life for you.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Americans!

In your great history you have pages that will allow you to understand Ukrainians. Understand us now. When it is needed most.

Remember Pearl Harbor. Terrible morning of December 7, 1941. When your sky was black from the planes attacking you. Just remember that.

Remember September 11th. A terrible day in 2001, when evil tried to turn your cities into a battlefield. When innocent people were attacked. Attacked from the air. In a way no one expected.

In a way you could not stop it. Our state experiences this every day! Every night! For three weeks now! Different Ukrainian cities... Odesa and Kharkiv, Chernihiv and Sumy, Zhytomyr and Lviv, Mariupol and Dnipro. Russia has turned the Ukrainian sky into a source of death. For thousands of people.

Russian troops have already fired nearly a thousand missiles at Ukraine. Countless bombs. They use drones to kill more precisely. This is a terror Europe has not seen for 80 years!

And we ask for a response. For the response from the world. For the response to terror. Is this too much of a request?

To establish a no-fly zone over Ukraine is to save people. Humanitarian no-fly zone. Conditions under which Russia will no longer be able to terrorize our peaceful cities every day and night. If that's too much, we offer an alternative.

You know what defense systems we need. C-300 and other similar systems.

You know how much depends on the battlefield on the ability to use aircraft. Powerful, strong aircraft. To protect your people. Your freedom. Your land. Aircraft that can help Ukraine. That can help Europe.

And you also know that they are available. But on land. Not in the Ukrainian sky. They do not protect our people.

"I have a dream" - these words are known to each of you. Today I can say: I have a necessity. The necessity to protect our sky. The necessity for your decision. Your help. And it will mean exactly the same thing. The same thing you feel. When you hear: I have a dream.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Friends!

Ukraine is grateful to the United States for its overwhelming support. For all that your state and your people have already done for our freedom. For weapons and ammunition, for training and funding, for leadership in the free world, which helps put pressure on the aggressor economically.

I am grateful to President Biden for his personal involvement, for his sincere commitment to the defense of Ukraine and democracy around the world.

I am grateful to you for the resolution, which recognizes all those who commit crimes against the Ukrainian people as war criminals.

However, now, in the darkest time for our country, for the whole of Europe, I urge you to do more! New packages of sanctions are needed every week. Until the Russian military machine stops. Restrictions are needed as regards everyone on whom this unjust regime is based.

We offer the United States to impose sanctions against all politicians in the Russian Federation who remain in office and do not sever ties with those responsible for the aggression against Ukraine. From State Duma deputies to the last official who lacks the morale to sever ties with state terror. All American companies must leave Russia, their market. Leave this market flooded with our blood.

Ladies and Gentlemen.

Members of Congress!

Take the lead! If you have companies in the constituencies that sponsor the Russian military machine, keeping their business in Russia... You have to put pressure. So that the Russian state does not receive a single dollar, which it spends on the destruction of Ukraine. On the destruction of Europe.

All American ports must be closed to Russian goods and ships. Peace is more important than profit. And we must defend this principle throughout the world together.

We have already become part of the anti-war coalition. The great anti-war coalition, which unites many states, dozens of states. Those who reacted in a principled manner to President Putin's decision - to Russia's invasion of our state.

But we have to move on. We have to create new tools. To respond quickly! And stop the war. The full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine began on February 24. And it would be fair if it ended in a day. In 24 hours. So that evil is punished immediately. Today the world does not have such tools.

The wars of the past have prompted our predecessors to create institutions that were supposed to protect us from war. But... They don't work. We see it. You see it. So, we need new ones. New institutions. New alliances.

And we offer them.

We offer to create an association - U-24. United for peace. A union of responsible states that have the strength and conscience to stop conflicts. Immediately. Provide all necessary assistance in 24 hours. If necessary - weapons. If necessary - sanctions. Humanitarian support. Political support. Funding. Everything necessary to preserve peace quickly. To save lives.

In addition, such an association could provide assistance to those who are experiencing natural disasters, man-made disasters. Who fell victim to a humanitarian crisis or epidemic.

Remember how difficult it was for the world to do the simplest thing - to give everyone vaccines. Vaccines against Covid. To save lives. To prevent new strains. The world spent months and years doing things that could have been done much faster. So that there were no human losses.

Ladies and Gentlemen!

Americans!

If such an alliance, the U-24, had already been formed, I believe it would have saved thousands of lives. In our country, many other countries that need peace so crucially, that suffered inhuman destruction... I ask you to watch one video now. Video of what Russian troops did on our land. We have to stop this. We must prevent such things. Preventively destroy every aggressor who seeks to conquer another nation.

Please watch...

And in the end to sum it up.

Today it is not enough to be the leader of the nation.

Today it takes to be the Leader of the world. Being the Leader of the world means to be the Leader of Peace.

Peace in your country does not depend anymore only on you and your people.

It depends on those next to you, on those who are strong.

Strong does not mean big. Strong is brave and ready to fight for the life of his citizens and citizens of the world.

For human rights, for freedom, for the right to live decently and to die when your time comes, not when it is wanted by someone else, by your neighbor.

Today the Ukrainian people are defending not only Ukraine, we are fighting for the values of Europe and the world, sacrificing our lives in the name of the Future.

That’s why today the American people are helping not just Ukraine, but Europe and the world to keep the planet alive, to keep justice in history.

Now I am almost 45 years old. Today my age stopped when the hearts of more than 100 children stopped beating. I see no sense in life if it cannot stop death. And this is my main mission as the Leader of my people – great Ukrainians.

And as the Leader of my nation I am addressing President Biden.

You are the Leader of the nation, of your great nation.

I wish you to be the Leader of the world. Being the Leader of the world means to be the Leader of Peace.

Our defenders!

We are stepping up work to bring the invaders to justice. There must be an international tribunal. And it will be. For everything they did against Ukraine. Against our people. For every act of terrorism of Russian troops on the territory of our state.

The Prosecutor's Office of Ukraine and law enforcement agencies have already started this work. The launch of the activity of the investigative group of the International Criminal Court in Ukraine is also important, which together with our law enforcement officers is already collecting all the evidence, collecting the facts of war crimes of the invaders on the territory of our state. So that they receive the legal answer - legal and concrete.

I spoke with Karim Khan, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague. He is already in Ukraine, he has already started working. Therefore, the invaders will be responsible for all war crimes against Ukrainians.

Last night, Russian troops continued shelling Ukrainian territory, our peaceful cities, our citizens. Kharkiv and the region... They bombed the coast of the Odesa region. They fired missiles at Kyiv. Hit civilian infrastructure of Zaporizhzhia.

As of this morning, 103 children have been killed.

Russian troops have now inflicted hundreds of times more damage on Ukraine than on Donbas in eight years of war. And the territories of Donbas, border regions in the Russian direction, Kyiv region and the south of Ukraine suffered the most. The most affected areas are those that Russian propagandists have always spoken of as the place of residence of people especially close to Russia.

Apparently, there are no non-nuclear weapons that the invaders have not yet used against our civilians. That's their closeness. That’s their friendship. That’s, as they said in Moscow, "a divided nation."

A total of 400 educational institutions have been destroyed in Ukraine to date, the largest number is in the Donetsk region - 119. In Mariupol, the invaders seized a hospital, a regional intensive care hospital. Already damaged by Russian bombs. Patients and doctors are in captivity. Residents of neighboring houses were forced to go inside the hospital as well. More than 400 people are hostages!

And the invaders are using the hospital as a firing position to shell the city.

This regular crime of the Russian military against Mariupol is no different from Basayev's seizure of the hospital in Budyonnovsk. Although... It is different. Now it's even more treacherous.

Last night, the invaders took hostage six people in the Bucha City Council.

A Ukrainian rescuer who was captured in an agreed humanitarian corridor is being held hostage! The mayors of several of our cities, activists, a journalist are being held hostage... The Russian state has become an outspoken terrorist. And it is not ashamed. But it will be responsible for everything.

The world is already beginning to understand that without the recognition of Russia as a terrorist state, it will be impossible to restore justice for Ukraine, it will be impossible to restore international order.

Today I signed an important decree on a nationwide minute of silence to honor the memory of all Ukrainians who died in our patriotic war. All those we lost because of the Russian invasion. Because of the terror committed by the invaders .

Every morning at 9 am in the whole territory of our state we will remember the Ukrainians who gave their lives. All who fought. All military and all civilians. Adults and children... Everyone! All those who could still be alive if Russia had not started this war.

May the memory of everyone who died for Ukraine live forever!

The losses of the invaders continue to grow.

The number of killed enemy soldiers is already approaching 14,000. Tens of thousands of Russian servicemen were wounded. They have already lost more than a hundred helicopters. Soon there will be hundreds of lost planes.

More than 400 Russian tanks were destroyed, plus several thousand units of other equipment.

We take abandoned enemy equipment from the battlefield and use it to protect our state and our people.

Ukrainians!

If you know where the enemy is and where he abandoned his tanks or other armored vehicles, ordnance, inform the Ukrainian forces. Let's use everything for our victory! And for the sake of victory be wise.

Don't publish details of our air defense work when you hear the guys work. Do not publish maps that you find in abandoned Russian vehicles and in the broken command posts of the invaders. Please give them to our military. Let them use it to make the enemy suffer!

Today at 3 pm Kyiv time I will address the Congress of the United States of America.

This will be an important speech. A speech from all of us, from each of our defenders, from each of our citizens. Addressed to the most powerful democracy in the world. To the state and the people who can do a lot to stop Russian aggression, to restore peace on our land.

Eight years ago, on this day, the Russian state organized a fake "referendum" on the territory of our Ukrainian Crimea. Which it later used to justify the seizure of our territory. It was illegal. This was the destruction of the entire security architecture in Europe, which was created after World War II. But Russia went for it.

If then there had been at least a hint of such resistance, which we are showing now, which you are showing now... If then the world had reacted at least half as it should react now and reacts... I'm sure we would have had neither this invasion, nor eight years of war in Donbas. All this evil was born from the occupation of Crimea. From our weakness, the brutal actions of Russia, for which it should have been punished already in 2014.

We are much stronger now, we are united. Now we are a great nation.

But... We don't have a time machine and we can't go back to the moment when everything was decided.

We can and must fight today, now. We can and must protect our state, our Ukrainian life. We can and must hold negotiations on a just and fair peace for Ukraine. On the real security guarantees that will work.

This is an ambitious task. A difficult one. This is a long way. But I am sure that we, Ukrainians, can do all this. We, Ukrainians, can win. And return to peace.

To the peace we all so strive for.

Eight years of war in Donbas, 20 days of full-scale invasion. The third week is about to be over. We all want peace. As soon as possible. We all want to win. And there is always a feeling that a little more, and we will get what belongs to us, Ukraine, by right. But...

But efforts are still needed. It takes patience. We still have to fight. And work - everyone in their place. Everyone. In particular, our representatives, our delegation in negotiations with the Russian Federation. It is important. It is difficult, but important, because any war ends in an agreement. Meetings continue. As I am told, the positions in the negotiations sound more realistic. However, time is still needed for the decisions to be in Ukraine's interests.

Our heroes, our defenders give us this time. Defending Ukraine everywhere. Wherever the enemy wants to break through.

The invaders did not succeed today. Although thousands of their people were thrown into battle.

In the north and east, in the south of our state. The enemy lost equipment, hundreds of soldiers... Many Russian conscripts died. Dozens of officers. One more general is among the killed invaders. At least one general today.

The invaders also committed new and obvious war crimes. They fired at peaceful cities and civilian infrastructure. The number of missiles that Russia has used against Ukraine already exceeds 900. There are so many air bombs that it is impossible to count them.

Two more journalists were killed in an artillery strike by Russian troops. Ukrainian Oleksandra Kuvshynova and Fox News representative Pierre Zakrzewski. Another journalist was heavily wounded. The shelling took place in the Kyiv region.

And this is another big reason to tighten Western sanctions against the Russian Federation. Tighten until the Russian state stops the war.

Citizens of Russia! Any of you who have access to truthful information could already understand how this war will end for your country. Shame and poverty. Years of isolation. A very cruel repressive system that will treat the citizens of Russia in the same inhumane way as you, invaders, treated Ukrainians. What happens next depends on your actions.

I want to speak directly to all the officials of the Russian Federation, to everyone who is related to the current government: if you remain in office, if you do not oppose the war, the international community will deprive you of everything. Everything you have earned over the years. This is already being done.

The same goes for the propaganda system. The fourth branch of power in Russia. If you stay to work for propaganda, you are putting yourself at much greater risk than if you just leave. Just quit. The risk of sanctions and an international tribunal for propaganda of an aggressive war, for justifying war crimes.

Quit! A few months without a job is definitely better for you than a lifetime of international persecution.

Today the Prime Ministers of the three partner states and the three friendly states of Ukraine visited Kyiv. Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovenia. Poland was also represented by Deputy Prime Minister Jarosław Kaczyński and the Prime Minister of Poland.

I was glad to meet, to talk directly, in person, in our capital. This is important support. When our Kyiv is a target for the invaders, it is especially important and especially courageous to be here, next to us, next to friends. This is how leadership is shown.

And I invite all friends of Ukraine to visit Kyiv. It can be dangerous here. It is true. Because our sky is not yet closed to Russian missiles and planes.

The decision to strengthen our arsenal in the air has not yet been made. We have not received planes. But...

You know for sure that the eyes of all the people of the world are now focused on our capital, on Ukrainians. So everyone who is with us will receive gratitude. Not only ours, but also of other nations of the world. Everyone who is with us has a chance to become a real hero.

I addressed the Canadian Parliament. In fact, in front of the entire political community of this country - our friend. In front of all Canadians. I thanked them for their support - really sincere support. Canada was among the first to come to the rescue of Ukraine. And I called on Canadians to maintain that leadership.

Help Ukraine. Not in words, but in deeds: weapons, new sanctions against Russia. As well as an active moral position. A position as regards all international businesses that still stay in Russia, that do not leave. Although they fully understand that they are sponsoring the war, sponsoring terror.

My address to the United States Congress is scheduled for Wednesday. An important event.

And today I would like to thank President Biden and all the friends of Ukraine in the United States for the new $13.6 billion package of support for our country, our people. The law providing for this funding has been signed. We consider it as the first step towards the full restoration of Ukraine.

The Verkhovna Rada also met today. The meeting was effective.

Economic innovations have been approved - tax cuts that should save jobs and allow Ukraine's business to work. Wherever possible.

There is a zero rate of excise duty and 7% VAT on fuel to stabilize prices and ensure supply.

Business regulation is simplified as much as possible. We are reducing the activities of control bodies so that there are no unnecessary inspections for those who work in accordance with Ukrainian law and do not violate consumer rights.

The new law also provides the necessary guarantees for the territorial defense warriors - all volunteers will be recognized as combat veterans.

A technical decision was made to continue martial law. This is needed to effectively defend the state.

Also all nuances of police activity during martial law are settled. I am waiting for the adopted laws to sign them.

And I am grateful to the people's deputies of Ukraine for the fact that the majority of votes collected more than 340 votes in favor. This demonstrates the political unity of Ukraine. Finally.

When all parties and groups work together in a legitimately elected parliament, one of the main myths of the invaders that the Ukrainian government allegedly does not represent the will of the people is shattered. It definitely does!

And all the collaborators who decided to work a little for the invaders must already think where in Rostov they will hide from punishment.

I hope that on Wednesday the long-awaited rescue of people from the city of Izyum, Kharkiv region, will take place. The humanitarian corridor has been agreed upon.

Over the past 24 hours, 28,893 Ukrainians were rescued from combat areas in Sumy, Kharkiv and Donetsk regions.

20,000 of them managed to leave Mariupol. So far only by personal vehicles. There will be a difficult situation. We are fighting for you. Sorry, everything is very difficult.

The Ukrainian humanitarian convoy is still constantly blocked by Russian soldiers on the way to the city. But we will not give up trying to save people, to save the city. And I am grateful to each of our defenders! To every defender of Mariupol, Kharkiv, Sumy, Chernihiv, Zhytomyr, Mykolaiv and all other cities this evil wants to capture.

I am grateful to all who hold on and fight for life.

Your resistance, your resilience, your courage make it possible for Ukraine to survive. And save our people and our land.

I signed a decree on awarding state awards to 139 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine who distinguished themselves in the defense of our state. 32 of them - posthumously.

I also signed a decree on conferring the title of Hero of Ukraine with the Order of the Golden Star to:

Colonel Hudz Valeriy Fedorovych. Posthumously. For the heroic defense of Popasna in the Luhansk region.

Colonel Kotenko Serhiy Leonidovych. Posthumously. Thanks to his courageous actions and personal determination, several columns of enemy equipment were destroyed.

Colonel Maryniak Oleksandr Myroslavovych. Posthumously. Due to his determination, a large number of enemy soldiers, groups of fuel tanks and enemy equipment were destroyed during the defense of the Kyiv region.

Major Sbytov Pavlo Olehovych. Posthumously. Thanks to his professionalism and decisive actions, the destruction of several large enemy units was organized.

May the memory of everyone who died for our Ukraine live forever!

On conferring the title of Hero of Ukraine with the Order of the Golden Star to:

Senior Lieutenant Dozirchy Dmytro Leonidovych. His effective actions in the defense of the Kherson region allowed our forces to get out of the encirclement and continue the struggle.

Senior Lieutenant Sydunets Volodymyr Volodymyrovych. Thanks to his actions, the division of the Russian Iskanders was destroyed.

Polish brothers and sisters!

When I became President in 2019, it felt like we had a long way to go with Poland.

Because our relationship was pretty cold, our attitude towards each other wasn’t too warm.

This was the situation. But I wanted to go this way fast. The path to warmth.

Because we are such nations. I knew that we were akin by nature - Ukrainians, Poles.

I remember my first meetings with Andrzej Duda. From meeting to meeting everything changed. The coolness disappeared. We understood each other. As a Ukrainian and a Pole. As Europeans. As friends. As parents who love their families and realize that our children must live in a world of equal good values. Our shared values. They must live in a world where nations are independent, where freedom reigns, where the family matters, and where no one ever has the right to war, to invasion.

It is believed that the number seven brings happiness. That is how many neighbors God has given to Ukraine. Does it bring us happiness? The whole world knows the answer today.

And 78 Ukrainian children who died from rockets and shelling of the Russian Federation know it better than others. A neighbor who brought trouble and war to our land. A neighbor who obviously acts without God.

When there is someone who beats like a savage, it is very important to have someone who will lend a hand. And when the foot of the enemy enters your house, he will lend you a helping hand.

On the morning of February 24, I had no doubt who it would be. Who will say to me: "Brother, your people will not be left alone with the enemy."

And so it happened. And I'm grateful for that. Polish brothers and sisters are with us. And this is natural.

Just in one day, on the first day of the war, it became clear to me and to all Ukrainians, and, I am sure, to all Poles that there are no more borders between us, between our nations. No physical ones. No historical ones. No personal ones.

During the 16 days of this war, Ukrainian pride and Polish honor, Ukrainian courage in battles and Polish sincerity in helping us allow me to say very important words now. Words that there is real peace between our nations. Peace between relatives. Peace between brothers. And now I really want these words to be heard by our common Belarusian neighbors.

Peace between relatives, peace between neighbors, peace between brothers. We have to come to this with them as well! We will definitely come!

Dear Sirs! Polish brothers and sisters!

For a long time, various "stakeholders" tried to create an impression that Ukrainians and Poles live differently. And separately. Why did they do all this?

I will recall the words of President of the Republic of Poland Lech Kaczyński said in Tbilisi in 2008: "We know very well: today - Georgia, tomorrow - Ukraine, the day after tomorrow - the Baltic countries and then, perhaps, the time will come for my country - Poland”.

On February 24, this terrible "tomorrow" for Ukraine came, which President Kaczyński spoke about.

And today we are fighting for such a bad time for Poland and the Baltic States to never come. We fight together. We have strength.

Remember, there are 90 million of us together! We can do everything together. And this is the historical mission, the historical mission of Poland, the historical mission of Ukraine to be leaders who together will pull Europe out of this abyss, save it from this threat, stop the transformation of Europe into a victim.

Dear Sirs! We can do it.

We saw yesterday what the countries of the European Union talked about and in what manner. We saw who was the real leader and fought for a strong Europe. For common European security. And who tried to stop us, tried to stop you.

We understand why it is so important for Poles to fight with us. Together with all those who are for freedom. For us and for you, for Europe.

We remember the terrible tragedy of 2010 near Smolensk. We remember all the facts of the investigation into the circumstances of this catastrophe. We feel what this means for you. And what does the silence of those who also know all this mean to you, but... But they still feast their eyes on Russia.

Polish brothers and sisters!

I feel that we have already formed an extremely strong alliance. Even though it is informal. But this is an alliance that grew out of reality, not words on paper. Of the warmth in our hearts, not of the speeches of politicians at summits. Of the way you treated our people. Ukrainians who fled to your country to escape from the evil that came to our land.

More than one and a half million citizens of Ukraine! The vast majority are women and children. They do not feel like they are in a strange land. You met our people in your families. With Polish delicacy. With fraternal kindness.

Although we did not ask for it. And you did not ask anything for it. It's just the way it is between relatives.

That's why I address so simply: friend Andrzej, dear Agata!

That's why I claim that we have already united. We united to constantly gain and create freedom, as a great Pole, a close friend of Ukraine John Paul II said.

Today, I cannot be sure of all the leaders of all European nations, but I am sure that we will definitely be with you in defending freedom. As much as needed.

I am grateful for all the help we have already received from your state, from your people. I am grateful for your efforts so that we can secure the Ukrainian sky. I believe that we will be able to achieve the result in this, the result that we all desperately need.

If God allows and we win this war, we will share the victory with our brothers and sisters.

This is our greatness. And your greatness.

This is a struggle for our freedom, this is a struggle for your freedom.

This is the common history of great nations!

May God help us win!

This is how the militaries answer the Kremlin command's question about what prevented them from capturing Ukraine in four days. Strong people of the steel country. This information is unverified, but this fact is indisputable.

And if the lost invaders justify their failures with something else, it means that during the 16 days of the war they did not understand anything.

Well, we don’t take it so hard. We are ready to explain. Enlighten the invaders until they fully understand who they are and where exactly they should go. Go out of Ukraine.

Today in Melitopol the invaders captured mayor of the city Ivan Fedorov. A mayor who courageously defends Ukraine and the people of his community.

Obviously, this is a sign of the weakness of the invaders.

They did not find any support on our land. Although they counted on it.

Because for years they have been lying to themselves that people in Ukraine were supposedly waiting for Russia to come.

They did not find collaborators who would hand over the city and the power to the invaders.

Therefore, they have switched to a new stage of terror, when they are trying to physically eliminate representatives of the legitimate local Ukrainian authorities.

It is clear to any democratic state in the world that a legitimately elected mayor is a true representative of the people. Usually it's not about ideology, it's not about politics, it's about the lives of people in a particular community.

Probably Russia has become accustomed to this during the years of autocratic rule.

Perhaps they believe that the mayor is just a boss which is easy to remove, and it means nothing.

But it is Ukraine here. It is Europe here. It is a democratic world here.

Therefore, the capture of the mayor of Melitopol is a crime not only against a particular person. Not only against a particular community. And not only against Ukraine.

This is a crime against democracy as such. I assure you that one hundred percent of people in all democracies will know this. The actions of the Russian invaders will be equated with the actions of ISIS terrorists.

The whole country saw that Melitopol did not surrender to the invaders. Just as Kherson, Berdyansk and other cities where Russian troops managed to enter didn’t. Temporarily managed to enter.

And this will NOT be changed by putting pressure on mayors or kidnapping mayors. This can only get worse. For the invaders.

Ukraine demands the immediate release of the mayor of Melitopol and guarantees of full security to all heads of communities across the country. If you are becoming an analogue of ISIS terrorists, then what is the point of talking to you about something at all?

We will raise this issue, including in talks with international mediators who communicate with Moscow.

Today, Russian troops also disrupted the work of most humanitarian corridors.

But, despite everything, 7,144 people were saved. From Enerhodar, Bucha, Hostomel and Kozarovychi. And these are 7,144 reasons to try to organize evacuation for Ukrainians from the besieged cities tomorrow and the day after tomorrow.

We will do that. We will do everything to bring humanitarian aid to Ukrainian cities. I have to say this with pain - Mariupol remains blocked by the enemy. Russian troops did not let our aid into the city and continue to torture our people, our Mariupol residents.

Tomorrow we'll try again. Once again send food, water and medicine for our city.

I am confident that the Armed Forces of Ukraine will respond to every minute of our people's suffering.

And it's not pathos. Not a threat. This is a statement of reality.

The number of killed Russian servicemen on the territory of Ukraine already exceeds 12 thousand people. 12 thousand! The number of wounded invaders is many times bigger. We did not invite any of them here.

And we repeat to each of the invaders: you can still save yourself. At any moment. Just lay down your weapons and go home, leave our land.

The number of captured invaders has already reached such a level that this issue cannot be left to the structures that we had before the war.

Therefore, today the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine established the Coordination Headquarters for the Treatment of Prisoners of War.

Thousands of enemy soldiers who have been captured or surrendered receive from our state the treatment required by international conventions.

But there are so many of them that a special structure is needed to deal with all related issues.

I want to say it again for Russian mothers. Especially for mothers of conscripts.

Do not send your children to war in a foreign land. Do not believe the promises that they will be sent just somewhere for exercises or just somewhere in non-combat conditions.

Check where your son is.

And if you have even the slightest suspicion that your son may be sent to the war against Ukraine, act immediately. Do not give your son to death or captivity.

Ukraine never wanted this dreadful war. And Ukraine doesn’t want it. But it will defend as much as necessary.

Fortunately, we are not alone in this battle.

Ukrainians have sincere friends. Good partners.

Speaking in the Polish Parliament today, I paid a lot of attention to the importance of not being alone in today's world. How important it is to protect common values. And as a result - to feel that the borders between nations are blurred.

To make people closer.

Just like our relationship with Polish brothers and sisters. Just like our relationship with all our sincere partners.

Because the one who has friends can do anything.

I held talks with US President Biden.

We discussed how else we can put pressure on Russia to end this war and establish peace.

Russia will be deprived of the opportunity to trade normally with the G7 countries.

The less dollars Russian business earns and the less taxes the Russian state receives, the less opportunity the Russian military will have to kill our people.

Leading international companies are already leaving the Russian market. The Russian government has put its country outside the global world by starting a war against us. By starting this invasion. This is self-closure. Self-humiliation. Self-destruction.

In Moscow currency exchange offices, the dollar has already reached 200 rubles. And this is just the beginning. The beginning of international sanctions.

The next step is the United States’ ban on bringing dollars into Russia.

Consequently, there will be a shortage of currency. So, the course will raise even more. Consequently, prices will rise. Consequently, every citizen of Russia will feel that the absence of peace is a threat to him personally.

Not a single country in the world wished harm to ordinary citizens of Russia. Nobody tried to cause any damage until your government started a war with neighbors, peaceful people. A war of annihilation.

No one wanted to return ordinary Russian life back to the "wicked 1990s". Is that what you call that era? A time of upheaval and poverty. A time of very limited opportunities for ordinary people and very large inequalities.

Perhaps now, due to the efforts of propagandists, most Russians do not yet understand what awaits them. But the Russian authorities ALREADY understand this very well. Very clear. And they are very afraid.

That is why they are trying to close all free sources of information. Actually all sources of information. Even Instagram and Facebook.

But the modern world has learned to deal with such censorship.

My advice to thinking Russians is to look for ways to get truthful information.

And try to hide your smartphones and computers from the security forces on the streets. They're getting ready to check what's in people's phones. What do people have in laptops. I specifically warn you: learn to resist the repression that your government plans to increase.

Because thinking people should be in every country.

And in Russia, too. And they are in Russia.

And one more thing. Now the good news and the victories of Ukraine for all of us are worth their weight in gold.

Or silver and bronze.

And all this - for Ukraine - is successfully won by our Paralympians in Beijing.

Today, everyone is gaining glory for Ukraine. In his or her place. Shows the world who Ukrainians are and what strength we have.

With a weapon in hands on the battlefield or with a sporting rifle on a biathlon track.

Our boys and girls have already won 25 medals at the Winter Paralympics!

And take second place in the overall standings, second only to the hosts of the competition - China.

The Paralympics will end in two days.

I would very much like to say the same about the war. That it will end in two days.

Unfortunately, this is still unrealistic. But it will definitely happen.

Both victory for Ukraine and peace for Ukraine are achievable.

And they will be more valuable for us than gold, silver and bronze of the whole world.

Well, for now ...

Hold our ground! Hold on! We will win!

I know that there are over a hundred thousand of you all over the world today. More than a hundred thousand in the squares of different cities. We, Ukrainians, are grateful for this. And now I ask each of you to remember one number in each square... 79.

You will understand what this means. I will tell you now what it means for our lives, for each of us. I will tell all one hundred thousand and millions who will hear us afterwards.

We are experiencing a terrible war in Ukraine. Europe has not seen such a war since World War II. We did not start this war. This is a brutal and cynical Russian invasion of Ukrainian land. This is a war against the Ukrainian people - against peaceful and sincere people, whom I am sure you have known very well during the years of our independence.

And you saw that we are very similar to you. We equally value freedom. We equally value equality. We equally want to live. We just want to live.

We equally want only the best, the brightest for our children, for our families. But now we and you live differently.

Now when the war is going on and thousands of people have died in it! And 79 children have died in it. 79 children!

I'm sure each of you has photos of your loved ones. At home or just on the phone so you can watch when your heart asks for that. Photos of children, photos of parents. Photos of your loved ones.

We don't even realize it, but we always know that these photos are not the last.

Because we believe that we will see how those who are dearest to us will live. We’ll see how happy our loved ones are. How our children grow up, how they go to university, how they work. How they have their children. And then we will play with our grandchildren. Meet them after school, have dinner together.

Everyone in the millions lives with that hope. Hope for a truly peaceful life.

For new photos, new memories, new moments of happiness, which our state, Ukraine, is deprived of now.

While the war continues, we are in fundamentally different conditions with you. When you can be sure that you and your loved ones have a long future ahead, a normal future. And we want that. And we are happy for you.

And for us, what we have may be the last time. Just one last time. Today and never again. As for 79 Ukrainian children. 79 Ukrainian families. Destroyed by this shameful war - the invasion of Russia. 79 families who have lost the most valuable, but who are still forced to fight. They are forced to pull themselves up and survive. And fight. Fight for a future that is over for them. In those photos of 79 children killed in the war.

And what should we do... All of us - the Ukrainian people, Europeans - so that this number 79 does not change, does not grow. And so that Europe does not forget Ukraine-79.

Russian troops besiege Ukrainian cities. They are trying to destroy them. Imagine! Entire cities! In 2022! In Europe.

Our Mariupol, the largest Ukrainian city on the coast of the Sea of Azov, is under complete blockade. It is bombed around the clock. Russian troops drop air bombs on it and fire missiles. They even bombed a maternity hospital and a children’s hospital in Mariupol...

This is hatred of all mankind. They kill children and destroy maternity hospitals and children's hospitals. Why? So that Ukrainian women don't even give birth?

And this is all over our country, all over Ukraine, which is suffering from the Russian invasion.

They have already destroyed dozens of hospitals, hundreds of schools and kindergartens. They are destroying universities. Completely destroying residential areas with carpet bombing. Imagine what it is! And how to survive in this? What does it mean for Ukrainians, for our families, for our children? What does it mean when you can't find peace even in church. Because aviation bombs even churches!

Even squares... The same squares as yours... Where you are listening to me now. They bombed the square in our city of Kharkiv - Freedom Square. This is the largest square in Europe, which is no different from your squares. Except that it is destroyed. Destroyed by a Russian missile strike.

I am constantly asked in interviews: how can Europe help Ukraine?

I formulate the question differently, namely: how can Europe help itself?

Because this is a war not only against our people, not only against Ukrainians. This is a war against the values that unite us. Against our ability to live. Live, not kill like the Russian military on our land.

Do you feel why we are different from them? We live. And they kill. We are 79 lives. And they are 79 deaths.

I am sure that you want to stop the war just like every Ukrainian.

That is why my answer about the help that is needed for Ukraine sounds logical, natural to millions of people in democracies. You need to put pressure.

Such sanctions against Russia are needed so that every Russian soldier knows the price of every shot at civilians. We need such principles of European business that the Russian state does not have the money to ruin lives.

Put pressure on the companies in your countries to leave Russia, so that you are not indirect sponsors of this war and tragedy.

Tell your politicians to close the sky over Ukraine from Russian missiles and planes. From those who killed 79 children and thousands of adults! Thousands in 17 days...

All this will protect us. We are just like you. Absolutely the same! You know that. You feel it. You see me and you understand all this.

And you know that we must be together in the European community. This is extremely important for Ukraine. And this is very important for you, for Europe. Because this will strengthen Europe. This will protect Europe. This will stop the war forever. This will prove that the 79 lives taken in the war for freedom have not been lost in vain. That they are alive. That they live among us. And they are among other children of Ukraine and Europe, who will be able to be free, will be able to dream, will be able to just live as they want. In peace. And not to be afraid that they may be killed. And not to look for the nearest air bomb shelter. Just as you are not looking for it - each of the hundred thousand in the squares of European cities that are listening to me now. And just as millions who, I'm sure, will hear me.

Hear about Ukraine-79. About Ukraine-2022. About Ukraine, which seeks peace. And about Europe, for which it is time to choose.

Wise people of a strong country!

The 17th day of the war is over. War for the right to be free. For the right to live on our land the way we, Ukrainians, want it. Not the way someone came up with for us. And against us. Against our nature. Against our character.

The Russian invaders cannot conquer us. They do not have such strength. They do not have such spirit. They are holding only on violence. Only on terror. Only on weapons, which they have a lot. But the invaders have no natural basis for normal life. So that people can feel happy and dream. They are organically incapable of making life normal! Wherever Russia has come to a foreign land, dreams are impossible.

Only a very hard struggle for survival.

As a result of the attack on our land, on Ukraine, the Russian leadership is actually turning its state into an analogue of the so-called "DPR" and "LPR". Into a large area isolated from the rest of the world. Where poverty will reign. Where everything will be determined only by violence. And where people will flee. In any manner they can and whoever can.

Look who is leaving Russia now. Who withdraws business. These are professionals who can be competitive at the global market. These are IT specialists who do not want to live in an area where there is no freedom. These are businessmen who feel that everything will be taken away from them at any moment. These are artists who know that creativity in a territory where human life is worthless is also worthless.

Russia loses its brains. Loses talent. Loses money.

But if this is happening to Russia, then what awaits the so-called "DPR" and "LPR"? Their analogues? Solely complete degradation.

The invaders in the Kherson region are trying to repeat the notorious experience of the formation of pseudo-republics. Blackmail local leaders, put pressure on deputies. Look for someone to bribe. They’re trying to organize the so-called "KPR". Stillborn as "DPR" and "LPR". To organize some "committees" against the legitimate government on our land. And against the will of the people who go out to protest every day. And who want Ukraine. I am grateful to them.

I want to tell some figures who lacked the disgust to refuse to talk to the invaders... I want to say - if some of them were suddenly tempted by proposals from the invaders... You sign your sentence.

The sentence is to follow more than 12,000 invaders who failed to understand in time why Ukraine should not be encroached upon.

An emergency meeting of the Kherson Regional Council took place. 44 deputies decided that the Kherson region is Ukraine, and no pseudo-republics have a place there.

Ukraine will stand the test. We need time and strength to break the military machine that came to our land.

I will not underestimate the threat. And I will not exaggerate the achievements. We are honest people, not Russia's Ministry of Defense. Which lies to everyone - millions of its citizens and even the head of the Russian Federation. So I say frankly: we still need to hold on. We still have to fight. Every day and every night we must look for ways to cause maximum damage to the enemy. In all areas of defense. Near Zhytomyr and Kyiv, near Chernihiv and Sumy, near Kharkiv and Luhansk, near Donetsk and Mariupol, in the south of the country and on the diplomatic frontline.

Having such tactics and having self-confidence, we will regain what’s ours.

We will come to Melitopol and Henichesk. We will come wherever our land is. And let the invaders know. Let all the collaborators they find know. That Ukraine will not forgive them. Nobody. Nothing.

Ukraine will not forget. Ukraine will find and prosecute. Every single one. In any possible way.

By the way, all humanitarian corridors, which were agreed upon, worked. 12,729 people were evacuated. The humanitarian cargo for Mariupol is to arrive tomorrow afternoon. Due to the complexity of the route they had to spend the night in Berdyansk.

On every occasion, I constantly repeat to our friends and partners abroad that they should do more for Ukraine, for Ukrainians. Because it is not only for Ukraine. This is for everyone in Europe.

Evil that purposefully bombs peaceful cities... Evil that fires even at ambulances and blows up hospitals will not be able to stop at one country. If it has the strength to go further.

I said this at a very important rally in support of our people, which was organized in Europe. More than a hundred thousand people in the squares of Italy and other countries of the continent gathered for a rally in support of Ukraine and against Russian aggression.

Millions of people heard my appeal later thanks to broadcasts and recordings.

We now enjoy the greatest support in the history of Ukraine for our aspirations and our independence.

You can take a public opinion poll in any country and you will see that Ukraine is among the leaders of those who are sympathized with and supported.

And Russia is not just among enemies. It is even a bigger enemy, bigger evil than North Korea. That's what Americans think, for example. Ordinary people in all states. As well as ordinary people in all European countries.

And I am grateful to them for this extraordinary support. Grateful for understanding our struggle. Because we are united by one dream - to live freely on our land. And we have the right to what everyone has in the free world. To a safe sky, as well as to our own land.

Dear Ukrainians!

Our heroes!

The world has always loved those who fight against evil.

It was our resistance, the courage of all our people that inspired the world. Millions of people in different countries. Who 17 days ago might not have felt what they all have in common. We all have. And now it's obvious. Peace. Freedom. And love for our children. The children we are fighting for. For them to have a future.

I signed two important decrees.

On awarding 106 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine who bravely showed themselves in the battles for the independence of Ukraine. 17 of them, unfortunately, posthumously. But they are heroes.

I - the decree on conferring the title of Hero of Ukraine with the award of the Order of the Golden Star to:

Senior Sergeant Vasich Serhiy Viktorovych. Posthumously. He bravely defended our positions in the Kyiv region. Destroyed enemy equipment and a significant amount of enemy manpower.

Senior soldier Parkhomuk Vitaliy Vasyliovych. Posthumously. During the counterattack on the enemy near the city of Makariv, he inflicted significant losses on the enemy and died heroically defending his brothers-in-arms.

Soldier Mrochko Kostiantyn Vasyliovych. Posthumously. He fought bravely against the overwhelming forces of the enemy. Thanks to his effective actions, the invaders suffered painful losses.

Soldier Svynchuk Oleh Anatoliyovych. Posthumously. He heroically performed his duty in the battle against the overwhelming forces of the enemy. He was helping his brothers-in-arms until the last moment.

Sergeant Khanin Andriy Pavlovych. Posthumously. Defending Volnovakha, Donetsk region, he destroyed an enemy tank and about 10 enemies. During the battle, when he was wounded, he helped his wounded brothers-in-arms and performed his duty to the last.

Sergeant Derusova Inna Mykolaivna. Posthumously. Since February 24, the senior combat medic has performed tasks in the city of Okhtyrka, Sumy region. She saved more than 10 servicemen, risking her own life. She died from artillery shelling by Russian troops, helping the wounded. The first woman - hero of Ukraine, who was posthumously awarded this title.

Eternal memory to all who gave their lives for Ukraine!

The title of Hero of Ukraine with the Order of the Golden Star is conferred upon:

Senior Lieutenant Hutsul Volodymyr Oleksandrovych. Thanks to his heroic actions in the Kherson region, 25 units of enemy equipment and about 300 invaders were destroyed.

Senior Lieutenant Chornyi Volodymyr Volodymyrovych. Thanks to his skilful actions during the defense of Volnovakha, Donetsk region, about 50 enemies and a T-72 tank were destroyed, as well as 5 invaders were captured.

Strong people of an unbreakable country!

Today is the 18th day. The 18th day of our war for life, for Ukraine, for independence.

The beginning of this day was black. Russian missiles and air bombs hit our country again. From east to west.

30 missiles for the Lviv region alone. The shelling of the International Center for Peacekeeping and Security killed 35 people and wounded 134 others.

Nothing was happening there that could threaten the territory of the Russian Federation. And only 20 kilometers away are NATO borders.

Last year, I made a clear warning to NATO leaders that if there were no tough preventive sanctions against Russia, it would start a war. We were right.

I have been saying for a long time that Nord Stream is a weapon that will hit Europe. Now it's obvious.

And now I repeat again - if you do not close our sky, it is only a matter of time before Russian missiles fall on your territory. NATO territory. On the homes of citizens of NATO countries.

An American journalist was killed in the Kyiv region today. Brent Renaud. His colleague was wounded. It was a deliberate attack by the Russian military.

They knew what they were doing. But not everyone in the West seems to know what they are doing.

In the east of our country, the invaders decided to "demilitarize" and "denazify" the Sviatohirsk Lavra of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Moscow Patriarchate.

At the time of the attack, only monks and hundreds of refugees were on the territory of the monastery. No military target in or near the monastery. But Russian troops do not stop even before striking at the monastery.

This fact alone demonstrates that the whole ideology of the Russian state is simply a lie.

Today I visited our guys, our defenders who are recovering from wounds at a military hospital.

We talked. I presented awards. Orders and medals - for courage, for glory for Ukraine.

And I really want my greeting "I wish you good health" to work today as powerfully as our Armed Forces have been holding key frontiers. For 18 days already.

By the way, the Russian military from Ryazan is being treated in the same hospital. He is in the same ward with our defenders. Gets the same aid. From the same doctors. Despite what this guy was doing. Against us, against Ukraine. But Ukrainian doctors saved him. And this is obvious. Because they are people. Not savages. And we have to go through this war so that we all remain human.

I am grateful to all the doctors and nurses who work in Kyiv and Dnipro, in Vinnytsia and Lviv, in Chernihiv and Donbas, in Kharkiv, in Melitopol, in Mariupol...

Everyone!

Mariupol Military Hospital.

Pokrovsk Military Mobile Hospital.

Chasiv Yar Military Mobile Hospital.

Military Medical Clinical Center of the Eastern Region.

Cherkaske Military Hospital.

Military Medical Clinical Center of the Central Region, Vinnytsia.

Military Medical Clinical Center of the Western Region, Lviv.

Military Medical Rehabilitation Center, left Irpen, but continues to work.

Sincere gratitude!

From all of us. From all Ukrainians.

I also visited checkpoints today. I didn't want it to be very public.

Just to support our guys. To talk. Courageous men, cheerful guys. Who defend Kyiv and know that WE will win. It is felt.

We will win due to our unique ability to unite.

We can always care for our people. Ours in spirit, in heart, in sincerity.

I met an extraordinary person there at the checkpoint who supports our defenders every day and brings them a pot of borscht every day. Really delicious! Truly Ukrainian. Wholeheartedly. And I know that our state has been based on such people for centuries. It is thanks to such people that we will survive any dark days. Because we are together. And we always protect our own people. And our own property. NOT for money. Without coercion. NOT like those who came to us. Just because we are Ukrainians.

Important international negotiations. Bulgaria, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Romania, Poland, Britain.

We feel the support of these countries. We feel the support for our army. It is important.

I also spoke with Charles Michel, President of the European Council. About our European perspective, which is becoming a reality.

Now about the negotiations with the Russian Federation.

Representatives of our countries’ delegations speak in video format every day. Our delegation has a clear task - to do everything to ensure a meeting of the presidents. The meeting that I am sure people are waiting for.

Obviously this is a difficult story. A hard path. But this path is needed. And our goal is for Ukraine to get the necessary result in this struggle, in this negotiation work. Necessary for peace. And for security.

So that we have guarantees - normal, effective. NOT like the Budapest ones and not like in our sky. So that Ukrainians could say: this is what works. These are the guarantees.

It is necessary to talk.

More than ten humanitarian corridors worked. Kyiv region, Luhansk region... 5550 people were saved in one day. In six days - more than 130,000. It is necessary to talk.

And this is also due to negotiations. We have to understand that.

Unfortunately, the humanitarian corridor to Mariupol was blocked. Again. We did everything necessary. Ensured "silence". Russian troops disrupted the movement of cargo and buses.

But we will try again. Until we can help our people. Because they are ours. Our Mariupol. Heroic Mariupol.

Ukrainians!

We are going through the worst ordeal in our history. In our lives. We protect the most precious thing we have. We must hold on. We must fight. And we will win. I know that. I believe in that.

Good weather, which we now almost do not notice. Clear sky... There is no such thing over Kyiv today. Over Kyiv and other cities of our state. Due to missile strikes, traces of enemy aircraft. The streets are quiet, but I know, I believe it's not for long. Not forever. That's why we work. That is why we fight. That's why we don't give what’s ours.

Today we celebrate our purely Ukrainian holiday. Volunteer Day.

It is our ability to instantly unite during ordeals, find common ground and fight together that creates our character, Ukrainian character.

We may not notice each other in everyday life. Agree, this happens to us.

But when we see a threat to our way of life, to our spirit, when we see a threat to Ukraine, our state, we do not hesitate even for a moment. If we are Ukrainians.

We unite. We do everything to protect what’s ours.

Ukrainians do not need to be persuaded to become volunteers. Ukrainians do not need to be encouraged to start helping each other.

Strong support for the Armed Forces by all the people of Ukraine, sincere volunteer movement, mass joining the territorial defense, solidarity of all our people - these are the prerequisites for victory. Prerequisites for the liberation of our entire country... The only and the best.

For us, Ukraine is not just a territory, as for the invaders. They do not distinguish anything here. They do not understand anything. That is why for them everything is just a target.

For us, Ukraine is millions of happy moments, native symbols, memorable places.

We feel this land. For us, Ukraine is our life, and that is why millions of people have come to the defense of our state today. That is why today we are all volunteers. All those who defend Ukraine, our children, those who defend our future.

To all who feel this free call... A call to defend Ukraine... Who are volunteers in battles. Or in the information troops. Who protects roads and cities. All diplomats - official and informal. Everyone who helps with technology. Who keeps the business. Who supplies the necessary goods, products. Who saves and heals under any circumstances. Who works in transport. Who provides communication and repairs networks... I am grateful to everyone. And I sincerely congratulate you!

Each of the volunteers. Each of the millions working together to win.

The 19th day of our resistance.

The Armed Forces of Ukraine are holding on bravely. And creatively. We inflict such losses on the enemy that he no longer knows where else to look for reserves. Where else to look for help.

Help for himself. Help for the invader.

This is pathetic.

But we have no right to relax.

The Russian state has been preparing for war for decades. They have accumulated significant military resources. For the evil. For the conquest of neighbors. And for the destruction of Ukraine, Europe, as we know it, as we value it.

That's why we have to hold on. We have to fight. To win. To come to the peace deserved by Ukrainians. Fair peace. With security guarantees for our state. For our people. And to put it on paper. In negotiations. Difficult negotiations.

The video meeting of the delegations has already started today. It continues. Everyone is waiting for the news. We will definitely report in the evening.

As long as the state is at war, as long as the people are defending themselves, the economy must be preserved and restored. As much as possible in the current difficult conditions.

Life must appear on the streets of the cities. Where security allows. Where people can provide it. Pharmacies, trade, any business that can work. For the country to live. For the restoration of Ukraine to already begin. And it depends on each of us, on each of us who is able to work.

Economic suppression of Ukraine is one of the tasks of the war against us. And we have to fight back from that as well. Save our economy. Save our people.

Therefore, the government has received a clear instruction - to return small and medium-sized businesses. Remove any obstacles. Reduce taxes as much as possible, remove all difficulties, absolutely all. So that the system does not press, so that people know that they can work the way they can. Where they can.

A new tax model is needed for the war and for the post-war development. The financial rules also need to be updated. To make people feel that they can be flexible. Feel that all the money and valuables will be saved. And that you shouldn’t be afraid of losing something, because the state guarantees the security of assets and savings.

The Cabinet of Ministers is already working on how to regulate this. A day or two - and there will be details.

Ukrainians!

Russian troops continue to destroy our infrastructure, continue to destroy our cities. Kyiv region, Chernihiv region, Sumy region, Kharkiv, south, Donbas.

But know - we will rebuild everything. We will restore everything. Every street of every city. Every house, every apartment of every Ukrainian. After the war, I'm sure we can do it quickly. We will direct all our efforts to this. All the help of the world. We are already creating funds for Ukraine to live.

But now that the invaders are still on our land, we must beat them as best as we can. Drive them away in any way we can. Defend the cities. Defend the villages. Defend every meter of our land. And every part of our heart. Ukrainian heart. Ukrainian soul.

Help each other! Support each other! Support the defense! And protect the state!

Together we will definitely win.

The 19th day of our resistance is over. Historical war. Another difficult day, which is still approaching our victory. Approaching peace for Ukraine.

As before, the enemy is confused. They did not expect such resistance. They believed in their propaganda, which has been lying about us for decades.They still can't recollect themselves. But they have already begun to understand that they will not achieve anything by war.

Their soldiers know this. Their officers are aware of this. They flee the battlefield. They abandon equipment.

We take trophies and use them to protect Ukraine. Today, Russian troops are, in fact, one of the suppliers of equipment to our army. They could not imagine such a thing in a nightmare.

And I want to tell the Russian soldiers. Those who have already entered our land. And who are just about to be sent to fight against us.

Russian conscripts! Listen to me very carefully. Russian officers! You’ve already understood everything. You will not take anything from Ukraine. You will take lives. There are a lot of you. But your life will also be taken.

But why should you die? What for? I know that you want to survive. We hear your conversations in the intercepts, we hear what you really think about this senseless war, about this disgrace and about your state. Your conversations with each other. Your calls home to your family. We hear it all. We draw conclusions. We know who you are.

Therefore, I offer you a choice. On behalf of the Ukrainian people, I give you a chance. Chance to survive. If you surrender to our forces, we will treat you the way people are supposed to be treated. As people, decently. In a way you were not treated in your army. And in a way your army does not treat ours. Choose!

Our brave defenders continue to inflict devastating losses on Russian troops.

Soon the number of downed helicopters of Russia will reach hundreds of units. They have already lost 80 warplanes. Hundreds of tanks and thousands of other units of equipment.

In 19 days, the Russian army has lost more in Ukraine than in two bloody and years-long wars in Chechnya. For what?

I am grateful to those Russians who do not stop trying to convey the truth. To those who fight disinformation and tell the truth, real facts to their friends and loved ones. And personally to the woman who entered the studio of Channel One with a poster against the war. To those who are not afraid to protest. As long as your country has not completely closed itself off from the whole world, turning into a very large North Korea, you must fight. You must not lose your chance.

The European Union has approved the fourth package of sanctions against Russia. The fourth - and I'm sure not the last.

We are working with partners on new restrictions that will be applied against the Russian state. Everyone who is responsible for the war. Everyone who is responsible for the destruction of democracy. Everyone who is responsible for repression against people. Everyone will get an answer. The answer of the world. And this is just the beginning.

Responsibility for war crimes of the Russian military is inevitable. Responsibility for a deliberate humanitarian catastrophe in Ukrainian cities is inevitable. The whole world sees what is happening in Mariupol. Kharkiv. Chernihiv. Sumy. Okhtyrka. Hostomel. Irpin. In all our cities.

All our partners are informed of the crimes of the invaders against civilians and local self-government in the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions. In the temporarily occupied areas. There will be an answer for that. Necessarily. For the disrupted humanitarian corridors. Necessarily.

During the day of March 14, 3,806 Ukrainians were evacuated from the cities and towns of the Kyiv and Luhansk regions.

Our convoy with one hundred tons of what is most necessary for Mariupol is still kept in Berdyansk. For three days already. But we will try. We will do everything to ensure that Mariupol residents receive food, water and medicine.

I provided full information about the actions of the invaders on the Ukrainian land in conversations with friends and partners of our state. Every aggressive action of the invaders only pushes the world to new sanctions.

I spoke with President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen. With President of Poland Andrzej Duda. Prime Minister of Luxembourg Xavier Bettel. We have 100% mutual understanding.

The conversation with Prime Minister of Israel Bennett was also important. As part of a negotiation effort to end this war as soon as possible. With a fair peace.

Our delegation also worked on this in negotiations with the Russian party. Pretty good, as I was told. But let's see. They will continue tomorrow.

The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine has agreed on a package of decisions to support our economy.

So that business works. So that people have jobs. Where security allows. Where people are ready for it.

First, we are starting tax reform. Instead of VAT and income tax we give a rate of 2 percent of turnover and simplified accounting. For small businesses - this is the first and second group of sole proprietors - we set a voluntary payment of a single tax. That is, if you can - pay. You can't - no questions asked.

The second is maximum business deregulation. We cancel all inspections for all businesses. So that everyone works normally. So that the cities come to life. So that life continues wherever there is no hostilities.

The only condition is that you ensure the normal operation of your business in the framework of Ukrainian law.

These are just the first two steps of our tax reform. To be continued.

And finally.

I have just signed a decree on awarding state awards of Ukraine to 234 servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine who showed personal courage and heroism in the fight for our land. For our independence. 59 of them posthumously.

May the memory of everyone who gave life for our state live forever!

Eternal gratitude to all our heroes!

Eight years of war against us. The 20th day of full-scale invasion. Attempts to destroy us all, to destroy Ukraine. We are fighting for our lives. We are fighting for our lives against missiles, bombs, artillery, tanks, mortars and everything else that Russian troops are using to destroy us. Everything else that Russia is destroying itself with now.

Because every shot at Ukraine, every blow at Ukraine are steps towards Russia's self-destruction. Steps to self-isolation, poverty and degradation.

Everyone who just wants to live and has something to think with is leaving Russia. Scientists, artists, businessmen, IT specialists, etc. The Russian state has not experienced such a blow at human capital for decades. A blow, which it inflicted on itself. We do not care. This is not our problem.

Our problem is to save our people. The strength of our society. Its scientists, its artists, its businessmen, its people, its strong people. All our Ukrainians who defend the state and bring closer the peace that every Ukrainian needs.

Last night there were air alarms almost all over our country. The airport in Dnipro was destroyed by a missile strike. Kharkiv. Russian bombs hit residential areas. Artillery. Mortars. Fighting continues in the region - Izyum, Chuhuiv.

Disassembly of wreckage in Rivne after the missile strike on the TV tower is ongoing. As of now, 19 casualties are confirmed.

Ancient Chernihiv and Oster are under such a brutal attack by Russia that it has wiped out any claims to its cultural ties to the times of Rus’. The invaders have no roots, no memory and no soul.

Russian troops attacked Kyiv, attacked Kyiv residents. Four apartment buildings were destroyed. Disassembly of the debris is still ongoing. As of now, five casualties are confirmed.

I will tell you in Russian: this happened in our capital. In the city that you always called “the mother of Russian cities”. That made our nations historical. And that you bombed today. Just people, residential areas. Bombed and bombed again. We don't need such children. No, thanks.

The invaders continue to consider the capture of our capital as their key goal, their political goal. They hope that control over Kyiv will give them control over Ukraine. This is absolute absurdity from all points of view.

To further strengthen the defense of the capital and the Kyiv region, I appointed Hero of Ukraine, Lieutenant General and Commander of the Joint Forces Operation Oleksandr Pavliuk head of the regional military administration.

Dismissed head of the regional administration Oleksiy Kuleba will help the military leadership.

Therefore, the Kyiv direction and the situation in the region will get even more attention.

Major General Eduard Moskaliov became the new commander of the Joint Forces. Professional man, patriotic man. The decree is signed.

Every morning, every evening, I thank the military. I thank all our heroes who bravely defend our state. All who stop the enemy despite the fact that the invaders are many times more. Dozens of times.

And now, today, I want to speak about all peaceful Ukrainians who were taken away by this war.

Eternal memory to everyone who died for Ukraine! Eternal curse to the enemy who took thousands of lives.

Humanitarian corridors have been partially opened today. There is a corridor from Sumy, Trostyanets, Lebedyn, Shostka and Konotop in the direction of Poltava.

The invaders did not stop the shelling and disrupted humanitarian corridors in the Kyiv region.

The convoy with humanitarian cargo for Mariupol also remains blocked. For several days in a row. But still little by little people are leaving the besieged city by private transport.

I want to thank SES officers, police, doctors and everyone else who saves people for this important work. And of course, I am thankful to our military.

Today I spoke at the summit organized by Great Britain, a friend of Ukraine - Boris Johnson. I addressed the United Kingdom Joint Expeditionary Force. Spoke to the leaders of the Baltic states and the countries of northern Europe.

I said what, of course, all our citizens would like to say.

About NATO. About help. About sincerity and... the fact that not everyone took a moral stance in response to the Russian war.

Each of more than 800 Russian missiles that have hit our country is an answer to a long-standing question about NATO. Whether the doors of the Alliance are really open for Ukraine.

If they were open, if it was fair, we would not have to convince the Alliance for 20 days that the sky over Ukraine should be closed. Closed to the death brought by the Russian Air Force. But... They don't hear or don't want to hear us yet. Some Allies have intimidated themselves. Saying that they allegedly can't answer. They cannot collide with Russian missiles and planes in the sky of Ukraine. Because this, they say, will lead to escalation, will lead to World War III...

And what will they say if Russia goes further into Europe, attacking other countries?

I'm sure it's the same thing they say to Ukraine. Article 5 of the NATO treaty has never been as weak as it is now. This is just our opinion.

When some members of the Alliance are afraid to be truly an alliance capable of protecting everything for which it was created. Freedom and democracy. Humanity and justice. We need to look for effective guarantees. Guarantees for us, for our sky. And we will not give up. We need planes. And I will continue to talk about it, I will continue to pursue it.

We need long-term security guarantees for the state. For all Ukrainians.

Concrete things. Concrete guarantees. Legally enshrined. So that there is no doubt in them. And so that no excuses sound. As they sound now, when we turn to those who signed "Budapest" and who... had the power to stop the Russian invasion even before it began. Using preventive measures. By helping Ukraine, which is convincing. Using sanctions that do not allow war.

Ukrainians!

There are more than 40 million of us in our state. And millions more around the world. This is a great force. Plus our friends. Plus many of our partner countries. We all now have a common task, a national task. We must put pressure on Russia so that the price for this war against Ukraine becomes extremely painful. So that everyone in the world takes a moral stance. Not only states, but also companies. I'm talking about business.

Large corporations that still sponsor Russia's military machine and have not left the Russian market, although they should have done so immediately. As soon as the world saw what Russian troops were doing on our Ukrainian land.

You know these brands. They are well known. And there are no secrets here.

Nestle, Mondelēz and other giants of the food industry. As well as Raiffeisen, Societe Generale and other banks. BASF, Samsung and LG. Bayer, Sanofi and other pharma companies.

Unilever, Johnson & Johnson... And dozens of other companies. And that's billions of dollars.

We turn to the world. To states and to people. But this is not just the work of politicians.

I appeal to Ukrainians. To everyone and in any country. Where you can influence it. Everything is in your power. All business with Russia must be stopped. All trade operations.

So that they can't sponsor the killings. Killings of us and our children. So that dollars and euros are not paid for blood. Please contact politicians. Put pressure. Talk to reporters. Boycott their products.

They must feel our strength! They must feel your strength!

Because we have the strength.

Dear speakers!

Mr. Prime Minister! Dear Justin!

Members of the government and parliament!

Dear attendees, Dear friends!

Before I begin, I want you to understand my feelings, the feelings of Ukrainians. As much as possible. Feelings during these 20 days. 20 days of full-scale invasion of the Russian Federation after eight years of war in Donbas.

Just imagine... Imagine that at four in the morning each of you hears explosions. Terrible explosions. Justin, imagine that you hear it. And your children hear it. Hear missile strikes at Ottawa airport. At dozens of other places throughout your beautiful country, Canada. Cruise missiles. Even before dawn. And your children hug you and ask: “what happened, dad?” And you are already receiving the first reports on which facilities in your country have been destroyed by missiles of the Russian Federation. And you know how many people have already died and where.

Imagine you are looking for words to explain this to children. Explain to them that a large-scale war has begun.

The war aimed at the destruction of your state, at the conquest of your people. And you know it.

The second day - and you get a message about the columns of armored vehicles. Thousands, thousands coming to your land. First - small cities, then larger ones. They want to block them all. And they do so.

They approach Edmonton - imagine - and fire artillery. Fire at residential areas, at people. Schools are being burned down, kindergartens are being blown up. Just as in our cities - in Sumy, in our Okhtyrka. They blockade Vancouver and besiege hundreds of thousands of people who remain in the city. As in our Mariupol. For the second week under fire, without electricity completely, almost without food, definitely without water. In the basements.

Justin! Dear attendees! Gentlemen!

Imagine hearing the report on the dead every day. Yes, you are the president or the head of government, but you just hear about it, about the dead children. And the death toll is growing. 97 children were killed as of this morning.

The famous CN Tower in Toronto... How many Russian missiles will be enough to destroy it? Believe me, I do not wish this to all of you...

But we predict every day how many more missiles can hit our TV towers. And they hit them.

Our Freedom Square in Kharkiv and your Churchill Square in Edmonton. Imagine Russian missiles hitting its heart.

Our Babyn Yar is the burial place of the Holocaust victims... The Russians did not stop before bombing even this land. And what about the National Holocaust Monument in Ottawa? Will it withstand the impact of three or five missiles? It happened to us. Air bombs. A minute ago there were people alive. There was a family that just came there. They were alive. And now... You understand.

And then a terrible night... each of these 20, when the Russian militaries fire from tanks at housing estates.

From tanks - at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Direct guidance. When the fire started there. Can you imagine that happening to your Bruce Station in Ontario?

And what would you feel if you saw your flag in every city where they pass, how your flag in Montreal is removed... Removed to be thrown away and replaced with a Russian one.

I know that you support Ukraine, sincerely, effectively. We are friends with Justin. But I want you to understand me, and to feel it.

Feel what we feel. Feel how we want to live. And how we want to win. Win for life.

I want you to feel what it's like when you call your friends and say: close the sky, stop the shelling. No matter which way, just do it. Stop the bombing. How many more missiles must fall on our cities?

And in response you hear that someone does not want to do it ... But they are deeply concerned!

Then give us planes, we tell our partners.

They answer: Soon. Be patient a little. Everyone is deeply concerned. They just don't want to. And someone is looking for reasons. The main thing is the result.

They talk about escalation. How can it get worse? They say Ukraine is not in NATO now. Although "the door is open". But for whom are these doors and where do they lead, if we are told that we will not be admitted.

War always shows everything people are capable of. Who is strong. And who is weak. Who is wise. Who does not see the obvious. Who is honest and who is a hypocrite.

And we saw it all. And we understood all this. In 20 days and eight years. I'm sure you've seen it all.

Dear speakers!

Mr. Prime Minister!

Members of the government. Members of parliament!

Dear friends!

Canada has always been, is and, I am sure, will be a reliable partner in Ukraine. Partner of our land, our people of Ukraine, each of our families.

You came to our aid as soon as we asked for it. You are giving us the weapons and other support we so desperately need now. You have imposed sanctions against Russia - truly moral. Really substantial. However, we see that the war, unfortunately, continues. That Russian troops are not leaving our territory. You see that our cities: Kharkiv, Mariupol are not as protected as your Edmonton and Vancouver. That Kyiv is under missile strikes. Like Chernihiv, Zhytomyr, Ivano-Frankivsk and dozens, dozens of our Ukrainian cities that yesterday were peaceful and quiet.

That means more needs to be done. Much more! For peace. We all have to do more to stop Russia. To protect Ukraine and protect Europe from this total evil that is destroying everything: memorials, churches, schools, hospitals, neighborhoods and all our businesses.

They have already killed 97 Ukrainian children!

We do not ask for much. We ask for justice. We ask for real support that will help us endure and defend our life. Life of the whole world.

Canada is already showing the necessary leadership! It is already the first to do what other countries come to later. But we need more leadership, and we ask for more participation from you.

Justin! All friends of our country Ukraine! All friends of the truth!

You understand how important it is for us to protect our skies from Russian missiles and planes. You can influence this. It seems so to me.

You can force even more companies to leave the Russian market. So that there is not a single dollar for the war. If they stay in Russia and sponsor the war, they are not allowed to work in Canada. Let it be so - and it will give us peace.

You know, perhaps better than many in the world, that this attack by Russia is an attempt to destroy us, to destroy the Ukrainian people. Nothing else. This is their main goal.

This is a war against the people. Against our people. This is a war to destroy everything that makes Ukrainians Ukrainians. Against our future. Against our character. Against our will. Everything that you, Canadians, know very well, feel very well.

So I ask you: do not stop. Do not stop helping Ukraine. Do not stop in leadership and in efforts to bring peace back to our peaceful land.

I believe, I know you can handle it. I know that with Canada, our anti-war coalition, which we are reinforcing, will definitely yield the result.

I want to address our Ukrainian diaspora, all Ukrainians in Canada.

It is at this historic moment that we need your effective help. And you must prove with your steps that you are a part of the history of Ukraine, the living history of Ukraine.

Remember this - living. Because we want to live. And we strive for peace.

I thank you for your support. I am thankful to everyone present in this hall of parliament. To every citizen of Canada. I'm grateful to you, Justin. Grateful on behalf of the entire Ukrainian nation.

I am sure that together - and only together - we will defeat all enemies.

Russian forces today brutally shelled Kharkiv with rocket artillery. This is definitely a military crime. A peaceful city. Peaceful residential areas. No military object. Dozens of eyewitness records prove that this is not a separate false shot, it is a conscious destruction of people. Russians knew where they were shooting.

For this crime there will definitely be a tribunal. International. This is a breach of all conventions. No one in the world will forgive you the murder of peaceful Ukrainian people. Here is Ukraine. Here is Europe. Here is 2022. Evil, armed with rockets, bombs and artillery, must be stopped immediately. Destroyed economically. We must show that humanity is able to protect themselves. I believe that it is necessary to consider the full closure of the sky for Russian missiles, airplanes, helicopters. In five days of invasion, already 56 missile strikes have been carried out against Ukraine. 113 cruise missiles were fired. This is their "fraternal friendship". And the world knows what to do. I spoke about this with partners today.

The state committing military crimes against civilians cannot be a member of the UN Security Council. The entrance to all ports, channels, airports in the world must be closed for this state . Such a state must not receive hundreds of billions for energy exports. Buying Russian goods now is to pay money for murdering people.

Peaceful, proud, strong Kharkiv. You have always been such. You will always be such. We will withstand this as well. We will defend Ukraine. We will help everyone affected by inhuman invasion. Chernihiv, Okhtyrka, Sumy, Hostomel, Vasylkiv, Kherson, Mariupol, Donetsk and all other cities and towns of our native country will see a peaceful and safe life. Sincere condolences to all who lost their relatives and loved ones in this war. Eternal memory to those who died. Eternal glory to everyone who defends our freedom!

Before addressing you, I signed a decree on awarding the title of the Hero of Ukraine to twelve our defenders:

Lieutenant Colonel Eduard Mykolayovych Vahorovsky (posthumously). He died saving our aircraft from a missile strike. Gave others the opportunity to take to the air.
Major Dmytro Valeriyovych Kolomiets (posthumously). He rescued his brothers-in-arms, diverted enemy aircraft fire and was shot down by an enemy plane.
Lieutenant Colonel Hennadiy Vasyliovych Matulyak (posthumously). Hostomel. Destroyed the group of enemy equipment.
Lieutenant Vitaliy Anatoliyovych Movchan (posthumously). In an air battle he destroyed two enemy aircraft.
Colonel Oleksandr Yakovych Oksanchenko (posthumously). He died in an air battle, distracting enemy aircraft.
Senior Lieutenant Vyacheslav Denysovych Radionov (posthumously). Thanks to his courageous actions, the entire crew of the brigade's planes took to the air in Vasylkiv, and this saved ours from a missile strike.
Senior Lieutenant Andriy Andriyovych Gerus. Over the city of Kropyvnytskyi he shot down an enemy IL-76, which prevented the landing of Russian troops with weapons.
Brigadier General Dmytro Serhiyovych Krasylnykov, Commander of the Operational and Tactical Group "North". For two days he has been fighting off the continuous assault, saved people and equipment. And did not let the enemy into Kharkiv from the Luhansk region.
Lieutenant Colonel Andriy Mykolayovych Kruhlov. He withdrew the Buk SAM unit from the enemy attacks and personally destroyed two Russian helicopters and one plane.
Colonel Oleksandr Volodymyrovych Mostov. He shot down a Russian IL-76 near Vasylkiv, as well as two Mi-24 helicopters, which prevented the landing of paratroopers and weapons.
Lieutenant General Yuri Ivanovych Sodol. In the battles for Volnovakha, he saved our men from the encirclement and organized a successful counterattack. He brought people out of the enemy’s attack. Defends Mariupol extremely effectively.
Colonel of medical service Eduard Mykolayovych Khoroshun. He personally organized the defense of the besieged military medical center and carried out the evacuation of the wounded.
Now about Kyiv, our beautiful capital, the basis of our state, our security. For an enemy, Kyiv is the key target. They want to break our national statehood. Therefore, the capital is constantly in danger. Three rocket-bombing strikes are carried out only today. TETs-6 is the target. They want to damage a power station and leave our city without light. We did not allow them to break the defense of the capital. And they send saboteurs to us. Constantly. Hundreds. All they are being neutralized.

In addition to defense, we are thinking about the rear as well. Provide people with everything necessary. We formed a round-the-clock coordination headquarters that collects all requests from regional administrations regarding the lack of the most necessary stuff. Products, medicines, fuel, equipment. The headquarters directly finds suppliers that can quickly and qualitatively meet such needs. This is the restoration of supply chains, interrupted by the war.

Today, at the initiative of the Russian side, the first round of negotiations between Ukraine and Russia took place. These negotiations took place against the background of bombing and shelling of our territory, our cities. Synchronization of shelling with a negotiation process could be seen. I believe that Russia is trying to put pressure on us in such a way. Don't waste time. We do not perceive such tactics. Fair negotiations are possible when one side does not hit the other side with rocket artillery precisely at the moment of negotiations.

So far we do not have the result we would like to get. Russia has declared its position. We have outlined positions in response - to end the war. Some signals we received. When the delegation returns to Kyiv, we will analyze what we’ve heard and then determine how to move to the second round of negotiations.

Another thing that is very important to say. We've been waiting 30 years for this. Today I signed an application for Ukraine's membership in the European Union. We have gained the right to be together with everyone in Europe. The application has already been delivered to Brussels, officially registered. The time has come.

Good morning, Ukrainian heroes! The fifth day of Russia's full-scale war against the people of Ukraine. We stand firm. During this time, we have experienced as much as other nations may not have in decades. We have been told for a long time that there is something wrong with Ukrainians in this or that issue. That Ukrainians have to do so-called "homework" for decades. Because of this, we often did not notice what we are really capable of. And now we have shown ourselves to the fullest. And it's inspiring. For everyone.

In every conversation with our partners, I hear sincere respect. Ukrainians have shown the world who we are. And Russia has shown what it has become. Just think about it: during the Russian invasion - in just four days - sixteen Ukrainian children died as a result of the Russian shelling. Sixteen! 45 children were wounded.

Every crime, every shelling that the invaders commit against us, unites us and our partners even more. Russia did not believe in such a solidary and powerful reaction. But Ukrainians have changed that story. The European Union has decided to supply us with weapons. We are grateful. Yesterday I spoke with Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, about further, even stronger steps. Europeans are aware that our soldiers are fighting for our country and, consequently, for the whole of Europe. For peace for all European countries, for the lives of children, for equality, for democracy. And this gives us the full right to do the following.

We appeal to the European Union for Ukraine's immediate accession under a new special procedure. We are grateful to our partners for being with us. But our goal is to be with all Europeans and, most importantly, to be equal. I am confident that is fair. I am confident we deserve it. I am confident that all this is possible.

Yesterday I spoke with the Presidents of Portugal, Lithuania, President of France Emmanuel Macron and President of Poland Andrzej Duda. I am especially grateful to Andrzej Duda for our fruitful work. I spoke with the Prime Ministers of Belgium, Spain and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Boris Johnson. Support of our anti-war coalition is unconditional and unprecedented.

Europe has closed the sky to all Russian planes. Global business refuses any ties with Russian companies. Let's see how this week will end for the Russian currency - what will be the fall of the ruble. As long as this criminal invasion of Ukraine continues, the Russian state is suffering losses as if the war passed through their territory. Do you need all this? Russian mothers, Russian teachers, Russian entrepreneurs, ordinary people. For what?

Four and a half thousand Russian soldiers have already been killed. Why did you all come here? Why do the columns of your armored vehicles go against us? From our Crimea. From Yalta, Yevpatoriya, Sudak, Simferopol... These are not the names of military camps for tankers. Once again: four and a half thousand Russian invaders killed. Throw away your equipment. And leave. Do not believe your commanders. Do not believe your propagandists. Just save your lives. Leave.

We dedicate every hour to strengthening our state. Anyone who can join the fight against the invaders must do so. Therefore, a decision was made - not easy from a moral point of view, but useful from the point of view of our protection. Under martial law, participants in hostilities - Ukrainians with real combat experience - will be released from custody and will be able to compensate for their guilt in the hottest spots of war. All sanctions are lifted from some people who took part in the anti-terrorist operation. The key now is defense.

When I ran for presidency, I said that each of us is the President. Because we are all responsible for our state. For our beautiful Ukraine. And now it turns out that each of us is a warrior. The warrior in his or her own place. And I am confident that each of us will win.

I had a phone conversation with Alexander Lukashenko. We haven't spoken to him in two years. And today I had a long substantive conversation with him.

I explained to him in detail the impossibility of our clash. I do not want missiles, planes, helicopters to fly to Ukraine from Belarus. I do not want troops to go to Ukraine from Belarus. And he assured me of that.

My task as President is to protect our state. And you have seen during these tough days how we are fulfilling this task.

Alexander Lukashenko called on the meeting of the Ukrainian and Russian delegations on the Pripyat River. I emphasize: without any conditions.

I will say frankly, as always: I do not really believe in the result of this meeting, but let them try. So that no citizen of Ukraine would have any doubt that I, as President, did not try to stop the war when there was even a small chance.

And while our guys are there, the President is here, the Head of the Office is here, the Prime Minister is here, the army is here, the Commander-in-Chief is here. We will all defend our state and our borders.

You and I must act pragmatically to achieve our goal. And our goal is our territorial integrity. You have seen our position one hundred percent. This is the unconditional protection of national statehood.

As regards our motivation. It is obvious that our servicemen are fighting not for money, but for today, for tomorrow. And they provide a very tough response to what happened yesterday.

But we must understand that today the most important job is to be a soldier, to defend the country. And that's why I really want the state to pay decently for this job.

We will pay our armed servicemen a hundred thousand hryvnias a month. Not to hear "thank you" from them, but to let them know that the country is definitely grateful to them. And it will be so until this war is over.

And the last thing. Yesterday, unfortunately, we lost our "Mriya". But the old "Mriya". And we are building a new one now.

This night was hard. What do they do? This is revenge. The people rose to defend their state, and they showed their true faces. This is terror.

They are going to bomb our Ukrainian cities even more. They are going to kill our children even more insidiously. This is an evil that has come to our land and must be destroyed.

They lied that they would not touch the civilian population. But since the first hours of the invasion, Russian troops have been hitting civilian infrastructure.

They consciously chose tactics to destroy people and everything that makes life just normal. Power plants, hospitals, kindergartens, residential buildings - all this is under attack every day.

What the invaders are doing to Kharkiv, Okhtyrka, Kyiv, Odesa and other cities and towns deserves an international tribunal. We clearly record all their crimes. And there would have been many more of these crimes if it hadn't been for our courageous defenders.

Ukrainian forces are great. Repulse attacks, breaking the enemy's plans. They do their job brilliantly.

Yes, this is truly a job. A hard, fundamental, and most importantly - fair job. A job that deserves the highest appraisal and the highest gratitude. A decision was made to significantly increase the payments to our defenders. I can honestly say that it will be expensive. But there is nothing more precious than life and the struggle for our freedom and freedom of our next generations.

And there are those who will help us. This is already real. We get weapons, medicine, food, diesel, money. A strong international coalition in support of Ukraine has been formed. An anti-war coalition.

Here is the latest summary from the diplomatic frontline. There were very substantive talks with the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, the President of Georgia, the Prime Ministers of the Czech Republic and Slovakia, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Johnson. Each conversation added specifics to the defense capabilities of our state and the strength of our military.

Germany has announced the supply of 1,000 anti-tank grenade launchers and 500 Stingers with additional ammunition. Belgium provides 5,000 machine guns and 5 million rounds of ammunition, and another 4,000 tons of fuel.

Thanks to active diplomacy, we’ve convinced all European countries to disconnect Russia from SWIFT. We thank President of Poland Andrzej Duda for his personal leadership in granting Ukraine membership in the European Union. Poland's daily assistance to our country is also very much needed.

We have to call a spade a spade. Russia's criminal actions against Ukraine show signs of genocide. I talked about this with the UN Secretary General. Russia is on the path of evil. The world must deprive Russia of the right to vote in the UN Security Council.

Ukrainians! We know exactly what we are defending. We will definitely win.

These words of mine will be addressed to the citizens of Belarus.

Today, all of you are called to the polls to vote in the referendum. This could look like a normal political process. But now it certainly cannot be anything normal.

Now decisions are made on a completely different level.

Last night in Ukraine was cruel. More shelling. More bombing of residential areas, civilian infrastructure. Today there is not a single object in the country that the invaders would not consider a valid target for themselves. They fight against everyone. They fight against everything that’s alive - against kindergartens, against residential buildings and even against ambulances. They use rocket artillery, missiles against entire urban areas in which there has never been any military infrastructure.

Vasylkiv, Kyiv, Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv and many other cities of Ukraine are surviving in conditions that were last seen on our land and your land during the Second World War.

But in the war that is going on now, you are not on the same side with us. Regretfully. From your territory, the troops of the Russian Federation launch rockets into Ukraine. Our children are being killed from your territory, our houses are being destroyed, they are trying to blow up everything that has been built over decades - and, by the way, not only by us, but also by our fathers, our grandfathers.

And all this is also a de facto referendum for you, Belarusians. You decide who you are. You decide who to be. How will you look into the eyes of your children, how will you look into the eyes of each other, your neighbors. And we are your neighbors. We, Ukrainians. Be Belarus, not Russia! You are making this choice right now. Exactly today.

Now there is a lot of news about possible negotiations between Ukraine and Russia, which can end this war and restore peace to all of us. And they often mention your capital. Minsk. As a platform for these negotiations. A place we didn't choose. And, in fact, you did not, too.The leadership of Russia chose it. And now, there is an offer to meet there again.

Four days ago, cruise missiles, planes, helicopters and equipment came from Belarusian territory. They hit our homes, they hit our lives. The heavy equipment followed. And this is a dreadful deja vu. You know, Kyiv was attacked at 4 am. Someone has such a sense of humor, just as in 1941. You slept, Belarusian brothers. And we woke up. But you are still sleeping. And we haven't gone to bed since that moment. Because we are fighting. We are fighting for our country. We are fighting for our freedom. Because we have every right to do so.

If there were no aggressive actions from your territory, we could speak in Minsk. In your city. When you were neutral, we spoke in Minsk, we met many times. This is right. This is truthful. To talk like neighbors. Right now, you haven't made your big choice yet. And it is ahead, it should depend only on you. Not on Russia, not on Ukraine, not on America, but on the people of Belarus.

That is why now we say - not Minsk. The venue for the meeting may be other cities. Of course, we want peace. We want to meet, we want the end of the war! Warsaw, Bratislava, Budapest, Istanbul, Baku - we proposed to the Russian side all of this. Any other city suits us in a country from whose territory missiles are not launched. Only in this way can negotiations be honest. And they can really end the war.

I sincerely wish Belarus to once again become that kind, safe Belarus that everyone saw not so long ago. Make the right choice. I am sure this is the main choice of your great people.

I can start this address with good news. We withstood and successfully repel enemy attacks. The fighting continues. In many cities and districts of our state. But we know what we are defending. The country, the land, the future of children.

Kyiv and key cities around the capital are controlled by our army. The invaders wanted to block the center of our state and put their puppets here, as in Donetsk. We broke their plan. They did not gain any advantage over us.

On our streets, in the skies of Kyiv, in Vasylkiv, in Vyshhorod, even in the surrounding fields, a real battle for Kyiv took place. The enemy used everything against us: missiles, fighter aircraft, drones, artillery, armored vehicles, saboteurs, paratroopers. The invaders are shelling residential neighborhoods, including with the use of missile artillery, trying to destroy energy facilities. They have very treacherous tactics.

Dwellings destroyed by missiles and artillery are the ultimate argument for the world to stop the occupation invasion together with us.

I say this as frankly as possible now: the people of Ukraine have already earned and have the right to become a member of the European Union. This will be the key evidence of our country's support.

It is a crucial moment to close the long-standing strategic discussion once and for all and to decide on Ukraine's membership in the European Union. I discussed this today with Charles Michel, Ursula von der Leyen, Emmanuel Macron.

The anti-war coalition is operating - defense weapons and equipment are heading to Ukraine. We already have almost full support from EU countries for disconnecting Russia from SWIFT. I hope that Germany and Hungary will have the courage to support this decision. We have the courage to defend our homeland, to defend Europe.

In each of our cities, the invaders are being severely rebuffed. Uman, Odesa, Kherson, Mykolaiv, Donbas, Kharkiv, Sumy, Chernihiv, Kyiv - wherever the enemy kills our people, the Armed Forces of Ukraine are doing everything to stop and destroy the invaders. Lviv and other cities in western and central Ukraine that are under air attacks endure firmly. Well done!

Every Ukrainian needs to remember one thing. If you can stop and destroy the invaders, do it. All those who can return to Ukraine, come back to defend Ukraine. And then we will have a lot of work with you to rebuild it!

All those who can defend Ukraine abroad, do it purposefully, unitedly, continuously! All friends of Ukraine who want to join the defense - come, we will give you weapons! All the details of how to implement this will be announced in the near future.

Glory to all those who defend Ukraine today! You are heroes!

I adopted a decision to posthumously award the title of Hero of Ukraine to Vitaliy Volodymyrovych Skakun, a sapper of the 35th Separate Marine Brigade. At the cost of his own life, he blew up the bridge.

And now I want absolutely everyone in Russia to hear me. Thousands of victims. Hundreds of prisoners who simply cannot understand why they were sent to Ukraine. Sent to be killed. The sooner you tell your government that the war must be stopped immediately, the more of your people will remain alive.

We see that there are indeed protests by your citizens against the war. We know that many in Russia are now simply shocked by the meanness and cruelty of the authorities. This is a truly correct response. I thank you for this reaction. Thanks to Leonid Parfyonov, Dmitry Muratov, Yury Dud, Liya Akhedzhakova, Valery Meladze and thousands, thousands of other Russians whose conscience is heard loud. Just stop those who lie to you, lie to us, lie to the whole world. We need to end this war. We can live in peace - in global peace, in human peace.

Our military, national guards, national police, territorial defense, border guards, special services, citizens - hold on! We will defeat everyone. Glory to Ukraine!

Today was a hard yet courageous day. We are fighting for our state absolutely on all frontlines: South, East, North, in many cities of our beautiful country. Fighting around the clock on the diplomatic frontline as well - it's easier to say with whom I did not speak to among world leaders today. We continue this. I have been constantly working and spoke with President Macron, Scholz, Rutte, Mrs. von der Leyen, President of the United States Biden. I outlined what answer Ukrainians still expect from the West to this aggression and agreed on new assistance, new support, significant assistance for our state. I thank all the leaders and I am separately grateful to President Biden.

I was really glad to see the news from friendly Georgia. I want to thank the good, beautiful Georgian people who went out on the streets of their country and supported Ukraine. You are true friends! Thanks.

Our main goal is to end this slaughter. The enemy suffers very-very serious losses. These are hundreds, hundreds of killed soldiers who crossed our border, who came to our land.

We suffer losses as well, unfortunately. Ukrainians resist the aggression heroically. It is impossible to justify. Therefore, the invaders have to come up with more and more absurd accusations to say at least something.

I am convinced that these allegations are biased, nobody will believe them. Ukrainians won’t believe them, the world won’t believe them, citizens of the Russian Federation won’t believe them.

It's simply cannot be such a truth that could clarify why kindergartens and housing infrastructure are fired from a missile artillery. In Vorzel, Kyiv region, they fired "Grads" at an orphanage. Okhtyrka, Sumy region, was shelled by "Uragans". Housing quarters, shelter, kindergartens were under the shelling. What is this war against Ukrainian children in a kindergarten? Who are they? Are they neo-Nazis from kindergarten as well? Or were they NATO soldiers that threatened Russia? Killed and injured children are the sentence to this invasion.

Everyone, I emphasize, everyone must do everything they can to stop this war. Every day of aggression destroys normal life not only in Ukraine, but also in Russia, and in Europe, in the world.

Europeans do not imagine yet what it is like to live when there is such a confrontation next to you. I have to say absolutely frankly: this night will be harder than a day. Many cities of our state are under attack. Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv, our boys, our girls in Donbas, cities of the south of Ukraine. Kyiv requires special attention. We cannot lose the capital.

I appeal to our defenders on all frontlines. This night the enemy will use all the forces available to break our resistance. Treacherously, viciously, inhumanly. This night they will make an assault upon us. We all have to understand what we are going to face. This night we have to withstand. The fate of Ukraine is now being decided. Each civilian should be as careful as possible. Help, please, each other, especially elderly people, lonely, those for whom it is very difficult now. In case of any danger go to the shelter.

Everyone who has already joined the country's defense or can help defend, stop the enemy everywhere you can. Remove special signs that saboteurs leave on the roads and buildings. Burn the enemy’s equipment with anything you can. If even kindergartens are a permissible target for invaders, you must not leave them any chance.

All thoughts, all prayers of Ukrainians are with our military. We believe in them, take care of them. Defend our state. The night will be tough, very tough. But the morning will come.

Chancellor of Germany Olaf Scholz yesterday said Russia's invasion of Ukraine is something Europe has not seen for 75 years. And it's true. But this is not the whole truth.

This is not just Russia's invasion in Ukraine, this is the beginning of the war against Europe. Against the unity of Europe. Against elementary human rights in Europe. Against all coexistence rules on the continent. Against the fact that European states refuse to divide, yes, to divide the borders by force.

The cities of Ukraine undergo rocket bombing for the second day already. Tank columns and air strikes are as similar as something Europe has already seen a long time ago - during the Second World War and talked "never again" about it. But this is it! Again. Now. In 2022. 75 years after the Second World War completion.

I’m confident you see it - all of you, entire Europe. But we do not see in full what you are going to do. How are you going to protect yourself when you help us so slowly in Ukraine?

I’d like to point out what has already happened. And for this we are grateful. Sectoral sanctions. The United States, Canada, United Kingdom, the European Union, Australia and New Zealand introduced precisely sectoral sanctions against Russia. In particular, against all the largest banks. Against the largest Russian enterprises. Against Russia's access to Western technologies.

But Russian tanks are still shooting at residential buildings in our cities. Armored vehicles are still attacking, including civilians. Ordinary citizens of Ukraine.

Europe has sufficient force to stop this aggression. What to expect from European states further?

Cancellation of visas for Russians? Cutting off Swift? Full isolation of Russia? Recalling ambassadors? Oil embargo? Closure of the sky? Today, all this should be on the table, because it is a threat to us, all of us, all of Europe. You can still stop aggression. We must act without delay.

Ordinary people can also do their part of the job, I'm sure, in every country of the world, in each country of Europe. Go out on the square of your cities and demand peace for Europe, peace for Ukraine, stop this war. Go out, go out on the squares and demand to stop the war. This is our right. This is your right.

When bombs fall in Kyiv, this happens in Europe, not only in Ukraine. When missiles kill our people, it's the death of all Europeans. Require more protection for Europe, more protection for Ukraine - as part of a democratic world.

While state institutions in Europe are in no hurry with really strong decisions, every European in the capital can already come to our embassy and offer assistance. Demand from your governments more financial, more military assistance to Ukraine. For this help is a help to you. For it is a help to Europe. You help yourself.

If you have a combat experience in Europe and do not want to look at the indecision of politicians, you can arrive in our state and protect Europe with us where it is now urgently required.

You have already been blackmailed with gas. Already humiliated. They already want to split and divide you the same way as they are trying to divide Ukraine today.

Protect yourself. Just as we protect yourself.

I want to address Russian Federation President once again. Battles take place all over the territory of Ukraine. Let's sit at the negotiating table. To stop the death of people.

And now I want to address the Armed Forces of Ukraine. Stand firmly. You are all we have. You are everything that protects our state.

The second morning of a large-scale war. At 4 am, Russian forces continued to launch missile strikes on the territory of Ukraine.

They say that civilian objects are not a target for them. This is a lie. In fact, they do not distinguish in which areas to operate.

Just as yesterday, the military and civilians are equally under Russian attack. The purpose of this attack is to put pressure on you, the citizens of Ukraine, to put pressure on our entire society. I emphasize: not just on the government - on all Ukrainians. And today - even more than yesterday.

Our men and women - all defenders of Ukraine - did not allow the enemy to realize the operational plan of invasion on the first day. Ukrainians demonstrate real heroism. The enemy was stopped in most directions. There are fights.

Therefore, Russia's attack continues with the expectation that our forces will be tired. But no one is tired.

Ukraine's air defense forces are protecting our sky. As much as possible. Enemy aircraft operate treacherously over residential areas, including the capital.

Terrible explosions in the morning sky over Kyiv, bombing, hitting a house, fire - all this reminds of the first such attack on our capital, which took place in 1941.

This morning we are defending our state alone, as we did yesterday. The world's most powerful forces are watching from afar.

Did yesterday's sanctions convince Russia? We hear in our sky and see on our earth that this is not enough. Foreign troops are still trying to become more active in our territory.

Only the solidarity and determination of Ukrainians can preserve our freedom and protect the state. The army, border guards, the National Guard, the police, intelligence, the Territorial Defense Forces - everyone performs their tasks to the maximum.

It is very important that today our citizens also demonstrate maximum endurance and mutual support. Take care of your family and loved ones, but do not forget about the people around you. Those who are single, those who are older. Help them with food. Help find shelter when there is an air alarm. Help with access to verified official information.

Stop the enemy wherever you see it. The fate of Ukraine depends only on Ukrainians. No one but ourselves will control our lives. We are on our land, the truth is on our side. It will not be possible to destroy our character. Kalibr missiles are helpless against our freedom.

Russia will still have to talk to us sooner or later. Talk about how to end the fighting and stop this invasion. The sooner the conversation begins, the smaller Russia's losses will be.

Dear citizens of the Russian Federation. As I said, tonight they started bombing residential areas of the hero city of Kyiv. It all reminds me of 1941. To all the citizens of the Russian Federation who come out to protest, I want to say - we see you. This means that you heard us. This means that you begin to trust us. Fight for us. Fight against the war.

Men and women, our defenders! You are brilliantly defending the country from one of the most powerful countries in the world.

Today Russia attacked the entire territory of our state. And today our defenders have done a lot. They defended almost the entire territory of Ukraine, which suffered direct blows. They regain the one that the enemy managed to occupy. For example, Hostomel near Kyiv. This gives more confidence to the capital.

According to preliminary data, unfortunately, we have lost 137 of our heroes today - our citizens. 10 of them are officers. 316 are wounded.

On our Zmiinyi Island, defending it to the last, all the border guards died heroically. But did not give up. All of them will be posthumously awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine.

May the memory of those who gave their lives for Ukraine live forever.

I am grateful to everyone who saves people right now and helps maintain order in the state.

The enemy strikes not only at military facilities, as it claims, but also at civilians. They kill people and turn peaceful cities into military targets. This is vile and will never be forgiven.

I know that a lot of fakes are being produced now. In particular, that I allegedly left Kyiv. I stay in the capital, I stay with my people. During the day, I held dozens of international talks, directly managed our country. And I will stay in the capital. My family is also in Ukraine. My children are also in Ukraine. My family is not traitors. They are the citizens of Ukraine. But I have no right to say where they are now.

According to our information, the enemy marked me as the number one target. My family is the number two target. They want to destroy Ukraine politically by destroying the Head of State.

We also have information that enemy sabotage groups have entered Kyiv. That's why I am asking Kyivites very much: be careful, follow the rules of curfew. I remain in the government quarter together with all those who are necessary for the work of the central government.

No matter how many conversations I had with the leaders of different countries today, I heard a few things. The first is that we are supported. And I am grateful to each state that helps Ukraine concretely, not just in words.

But there is another - we are left alone in defense of our state. Who is ready to fight with us? Honestly - I do not see such. Who is ready to guarantee Ukraine's accession to NATO? Honestly, everyone is afraid.

Today we heard from Moscow that they still want to talk. They want to talk about Ukraine's neutral status.

I tell all the partners of our state: now is an important moment - the fate of our country is being decided. I ask them: are you with us? They answer that they are with us. But they are not ready to take us to the Alliance.

Today, I asked the twenty-seven leaders of Europe whether Ukraine will be in NATO. I asked directly. Everyone is afraid. They do not answer.

And we are not afraid of anything. We are not afraid to defend our state. We are not afraid of Russia. We are not afraid to talk to Russia. We are not afraid to say everything about security guarantees for our state. We are not afraid to talk about neutral status. We are not in NATO now. But the main thing - what security guarantees will we have? And what specific countries will give them?

We need to talk about the end of this invasion. We need to talk about a ceasefire.

But now the fate of the country depends entirely on our army, on our heroes, our security forces, all our defenders. And on our people, your wisdom and the great support of all friends of our country.

We have been fighting for our freedom for the 16th day already. This is four times longer than the enemy planned for his invasion.

Four times longer! Against the army, which was considered one of the strongest in the world. Which hoped that the Ukrainians would surrender. Hoped that someone would meet Russian flags on Ukrainian streets, on our streets with flowers.

But Ukrainians are proud people who always defend their land and will not give the invader a single piece of land. Not a percent of their freedom.

16 days. I know that many people have started to feel tired. I understand. Impatience. I understand.

Emotions play a bad game with people. This is life. When we mobilize, when we see our victories and the loss of the enemy on the battlefield, we expect the struggle to end sooner. We expect the invaders to fall faster. But... This is life, this is war. This is a struggle.

Time is still needed. Patience is still needed. Our wisdom, energy. The ability to do our job to the maximum so that we can win together.

It is impossible to say how many more days we must liberate our Ukrainian land. But it is possible to say - we will do it! Because we strived for that. Because we have already reached a strategic turning point. We are already moving towards our goal, towards our victory.

This is a patriotic war. War with a very stubborn enemy who does not pay attention to the thousands of his killed people, killed soldiers. Who is now gathering reservists and conscripts all over Russia to throw them into the hell of this war.

Who came up with the idea of throwing mercenaries against our people. Thugs from Syria. From the country that was destroyed in the same way as the invaders are destroying us now - our Mariupol, our Kharkiv, Okhtyrka, Chernihiv, Volnovakha, Izyum, etc.

This is how Russian troops treat Ukrainians. This is how they treat Donbas, Russian-speaking people, as they said. How they shouted to everyone about "protection", which they talked about so much in Moscow. Rockets, air bombs, artillery. And now Syrian mercenaries who do not distinguish at all who speaks what language here, what church people go to, what party people supported.

Mercenaries who simply go to kill in a foreign land - in every sense of the word.

Over the past night and morning, the invaders carried out, as they say, "demilitarization" of the water supply system in Chernihiv. The city was left without water. We are doing everything to restore the water supply. Due to constant shelling in parts of the Sumy, Kyiv, Donetsk regions there is no electricity, yes, there are problems with heating, no gas, water. This is a humanitarian catastrophe.

Humanitarian catastrophe - two words that have become fully synonymous with the other two words - the Russian Federation.

At night, the invaders bombed a shoe factory, an apartment building and a kindergarten in Dnipro. For what? How did they threaten the Russian state? They destroyed residential houses in the villages of the Sumy region. They continued torturing Mariupol residents, Kharkiv residents.

They fired rockets at Lutsk and Ivano-Frankivsk...

If this continues, sanctions against Russia are not enough. And I expect, we are already working on this, new sanctions from our partners today.

Russia must pay for this terrible war. Pay daily!

A very important meeting of the leaders of the European Union took place yesterday. Long, substantive. We know what was said at this meeting. What all leaders said. Who specifically spoke. Who supported. Who remained silent. And who tried to make the wording insufficient - for Ukraine, Europe and our common freedom.

How do we evaluate the decision made?

It's very simple: it must be stronger. This is not what we expect.

It is necessary that the decisions of politicians coincide with the mood of their nations, European nations. We are aware of this mood. And they are aware of this mood.

Every politician is well aware!

The numbers are different in different countries, but there are polls and support is huge. At least 60 percent stand in favor. And this is the vast majority which stands for Ukraine to be part of Europe!

Europeans are clearly talking about this. And I'm sure they will clearly tell their politicians about this. If they haven't figured it out yet.

The decision of yesterday's meeting of EU leaders now reaches the level of the European Commission.

For implementation. For specific procedures.

The European Union must do more.

It must do more for us, for Ukraine. And for itself.

We are waiting for that. All European nations are waiting.

Our government officials have organized 12 humanitarian corridors today.

Cargo with food, water, medicine is already on the way. Izyum, Enerhodar, Volnovakha, Polohy, Bucha, Hostomel, Borodyanka, Andriivka, Mykulychi, Makariv, Kozarovychi, of course, Mariupol.

The Ukrainian servicemen have ensured "silence" for the humanitarian corridors to work.

If the invaders shoot and disrupt the rescue of people again, they will eventually receive such a response from the world that they themselves will need humanitarian corridors.

Our government officials, despite difficulties, are doing everything to ensure that there is fuel, products, medicines and all goods people need throughout the country.

Gasoline, diesel - everything is imported.

This morning I was asked a question at a daily conference call. Logical question. Given the spring. What about sowing? How to start it, especially in those areas that are temporarily occupied?

My answer is very simple: all over our land, no matter what, we have to organize a full-fledged sowing campaign this spring. Of course, as much as possible. It all depends on the people and the situation. Because it's about life. Life is more important. It’s about our life. About our dreams. About our future. And therefore, about our victory.

I repeat again and again: when we defend freedom, everyone must be like a full-fledged army.

Do everything we can in our place to get the result we all deserve. That's fair. To win. Necessarily.

Be sure to hold on. Be sure to fight. Be sure to give your all strength.

It will not be easy with such a neighbor. But with us, it will not be easy, too.

As it already turned out

One of the main tasks for us today was the organization of humanitarian corridors.

Sumy, Trostyanets, Krasnopillya, Irpin, Bucha, Hostomel, Izyum. Almost 40,000 people have already been evacuated this day. They were given safety at last. In Poltava, Kyiv, Cherkasy, Zaporizhzhia, Dnipro, Lviv.

Humanitarian cargoes were also delivered. Hundreds of tons of food, medicine.

We are doing everything to save our people in the cities that the enemy just wants to destroy. Taking into account the work of humanitarian corridors in the previous two days, we have already evacuated about one hundred thousand people.

But…

Mariupol and Volnovakha remain completely blocked.

Although we did everything necessary to make the humanitarian corridor work, Russian troops did not cease fire.

Despite this, I decided to send a convoy of trucks to Mariupol anyway. With food, water, medicine. I am grateful to the drivers - brave people who were ready to fulfill this mission. An extremely important mission.

But the invaders started a tank attack exactly in the area where this corridor was supposed to be. Corridor of life. For the people of Mariupol.

They did it consciously. They knew what they were disrupting. They have a clear order to hold Mariupol hostage, to torture it, to carry out constant bombardment.

Today they destroyed the building of the main department of the State Emergency Service in the Donetsk region. Right next to this building was the place where Mariupol residents were to gather for evacuation.

This is outright terror. Blatant terror.

From experienced terrorists.

The world needs to know that. It has to admit it. We are all dealing with a terrorist state.

But no matter what, we will try! Constantly! We will continue to try to bring to Mariupol the aid that people so desperately need. Ukrainians need.

The invaders are doing everything to deceive our people in the besieged cities.

They block communication. Prevent the provision of Information. The state is doing everything to help our city.

Everything to tell the people of Mariupol: we are fighting. And we will not give up this fight.

Therefore, if you have the opportunity to talk to the people of Mariupol, to write to the people of Mariupol, spread the truth. Remind them that Ukraine is with them wholeheartedly and is doing everything to stop the torture of the city.

Russian propagandists have substantially intensified their activity today. And they tried very hard.

Probably in order to cover up the crimes of their army in Ukraine. Crimes against Mariupol. Against Donbas. Against Kharkiv. Against dozens of other cities.

Cover them up with new accusations. New-old fakes.

They accuse us... Again us! That we are allegedly developing biological weapons. Allegedly, we are preparing a chemical attack.

This makes me really worried, because we’ve been repeatedly convinced: if you want to know Russia's plans, look at what Russia accuses others of.

Look, spreading such accusations in the Russian media shows that it is THEY who are capable of this. The Russian military, the Russian special services. It shows that they want it.

They have already done such things in other countries. Similar! They themselves announced, they themselves organized, they themselves complained. And they will do so again.

Again and again. If they are not stopped.

They tore apart Moldova with Transnistria. They tore apart Georgia with Abkhazia. They tore apart Ukraine with Donbas and Crimea.

But they blame us! Those who have become victims.

Those who are forced to defend themselves. Fight for the right to live.

They themselves come to us in tanks and with missiles.

They take something that doesn’t belong to them. Capture.

They are even ashamed to show their officers! They hide their generals. They conceal from their own people that they are sending conscripts to this war only to make the invasion forces larger.

But we are to blame! We are accused of attacks on allegedly peaceful Russia.

And now what? What are these allegations of preparing chemical attacks? Have you decided to carry out "de-chemicalization" of Ukraine? Using ammonia? Using phosphorus? What else have you prepared for us?

Where will you strike with chemical weapons?

At the maternity hospital in Mariupol? At the church in Kharkiv? At the Okhmatdyt Children's Hospital?

Or at laboratories, most of which have remained since Soviet times and are engaged in ordinary science. Ordinary!

NOT military technology.

We are adequate people. I am the President of an adequate country, an adequate nation. And the father of two children.

And no chemical or any other weapons of mass destruction were developed on my land.

The whole world knows that.

YOU know that.

And if YOU do something like that against US, you will get the most severe sanctions response.

Ukrainians! Our defenders!

I have signed several important decrees.

About awarding the title of Hero of Ukraine to thirteen of our defenders:

Lieutenant Colonel Litun Andriy Mykolayovych. Posthumously. He died covering our troops and heroically restraining the enemy's offensive.

Captain Korpan Oleksandr Bohdanovych. Posthumously. He saved our soldiers and civilian houses when he took the falling aircraft away from them.

Junior Lieutenant Blokha Yuriy Ihorovych. Posthumously. In the battles in the Mykolaiv region he heroically protected brothers-in-arms, saving their lives.

Senior Sergeant Ivashko Andriy Oleksandrovych. Posthumously. During the rocket fire, he personally provided information about the enemy's actions at the cost of his own life.

Junior Sergeant Volkov Yevhen Volodymyrovych. Posthumously. For courage and heroism during the evacuation of the wounded in the Donetsk region, for saving our military.

Major General Nikoliuk Viktor Dmytrovych. He skillfully led the defense in the north-eastern direction and managed to prevent the capture of Chernihiv.

Colonel Khoda Leonid Oleksiyovych. During the war, under his command, more than 50 enemy vehicles were destroyed.

Lieutenant Colonel Ponomarenko Vyacheslav Anatoliyovych. Thanks to his actions, a significant number of enemy’s equipment and soldiers in the city of Hostomel were destroyed.

Lieutenant Colonel Yakovenko Oleksandr Oleksiyovych. He withdrew his units from the enemy artillery fire, thanks to which he saved personnel and continued to successfully defend the Donetsk region.

Major Bova Yevhen Petrovych. For the heroic defense of Mariupol and holding positions under constant enemy attacks.

Captain Boyechko Vasyl Vasyliovych. For the extremely successful destruction of enemy equipment and manpower.

Sergeant Moroz Oleh Romanovych. Thanks to his heroic deeds, the enemy's offensive in the Luhansk region was stopped.

Sailor Samofalov Valeriy Mykhailovych. In one battle, for the first time in the history of this war, he shot down three enemy helicopters.

I also signed a decree awarding orders for personal courage to 39 national guardsmen, 31 policemen (9 posthumously), 14 border guards (4 posthumously) and 23 employees of the State Emergency Service.

Today the rank of Brigadier General is awarded to:

Nechayev Oleh Oleksandrovych. For the successful defense of the Kyiv region.

Lishchynsky Vladyslav Vatslavovych. For extremely successful actions against the enemy in the Kherson region.

Hutsol Volodymyr Volodymyrych. For the successful destruction of enemy airborne troops in Vasylkiv.

Demyanchyk Hryhoriy Petrovych. For the successful organization of personnel training for our military units.

And finally.

Discussions on Ukraine's future in the EU continue today and tomorrow in Europe.

I believe that our people, our state, our army did everything for us to be welcome there. As equals. For us to be invited there.

This is the final exam for Europe.

Among the leaders of the states there are those who support us. And there are also those who support only themselves.

But we see how the nations of all European countries treat us. And this is the main thing.

Because I know for sure - if people decided on our membership in the EU, they would definitely choose the people of Ukraine.

Today, when I see the support of the people of each country in the squares of European capitals, I know that the Ukrainian people are already in the European Union.

And politicians... I'm sure they will adjust to that.

Preferably faster.

Glory to the nations of Europe!

Glory to Ukraine!

Glory to our military!

Thank you!

One of the main tasks for us today was the organization of humanitarian corridors.

Sumy, Trostyanets, Krasnopillya, Irpin, Bucha, Hostomel, Izyum. Almost 40,000 people have already been evacuated this day. They were given safety at last. In Poltava, Kyiv, Cherkasy, Zaporizhzhia, Dnipro, Lviv.

Humanitarian cargoes were also delivered. Hundreds of tons of food, medicine.

We are doing everything to save our people in the cities that the enemy just wants to destroy. Taking into account the work of humanitarian corridors in the previous two days, we have already evacuated about one hundred thousand people.

But…

Mariupol and Volnovakha remain completely blocked.

Although we did everything necessary to make the humanitarian corridor work, Russian troops did not cease fire.

Despite this, I decided to send a convoy of trucks to Mariupol anyway. With food, water, medicine. I am grateful to the drivers - brave people who were ready to fulfill this mission. An extremely important mission.

But the invaders started a tank attack exactly in the area where this corridor was supposed to be. Corridor of life. For the people of Mariupol.

They did it consciously. They knew what they were disrupting. They have a clear order to hold Mariupol hostage, to torture it, to carry out constant bombardment.

Today they destroyed the building of the main department of the State Emergency Service in the Donetsk region. Right next to this building was the place where Mariupol residents were to gather for evacuation.

This is outright terror. Blatant terror.

From experienced terrorists.

The world needs to know that. It has to admit it. We are all dealing with a terrorist state.

But no matter what, we will try! Constantly! We will continue to try to bring to Mariupol the aid that people so desperately need. Ukrainians need.

The invaders are doing everything to deceive our people in the besieged cities.

They block communication. Prevent the provision of Information. The state is doing everything to help our city.

Everything to tell the people of Mariupol: we are fighting. And we will not give up this fight.

Therefore, if you have the opportunity to talk to the people of Mariupol, to write to the people of Mariupol, spread the truth. Remind them that Ukraine is with them wholeheartedly and is doing everything to stop the torture of the city.

Russian propagandists have substantially intensified their activity today. And they tried very hard.

Probably in order to cover up the crimes of their army in Ukraine. Crimes against Mariupol. Against Donbas. Against Kharkiv. Against dozens of other cities.

Cover them up with new accusations. New-old fakes.

They accuse us... Again us! That we are allegedly developing biological weapons. Allegedly, we are preparing a chemical attack.

This makes me really worried, because we’ve been repeatedly convinced: if you want to know Russia's plans, look at what Russia accuses others of.

Look, spreading such accusations in the Russian media shows that it is THEY who are capable of this. The Russian military, the Russian special services. It shows that they want it.

They have already done such things in other countries. Similar! They themselves announced, they themselves organized, they themselves complained. And they will do so again.

Again and again. If they are not stopped.

They tore apart Moldova with Transnistria. They tore apart Georgia with Abkhazia. They tore apart Ukraine with Donbas and Crimea.

But they blame us! Those who have become victims.

Those who are forced to defend themselves. Fight for the right to live.

They themselves come to us in tanks and with missiles.

They take something that doesn’t belong to them. Capture.

They are even ashamed to show their officers! They hide their generals. They conceal from their own people that they are sending conscripts to this war only to make the invasion forces larger.

But we are to blame! We are accused of attacks on allegedly peaceful Russia.

And now what? What are these allegations of preparing chemical attacks? Have you decided to carry out "de-chemicalization" of Ukraine? Using ammonia? Using phosphorus? What else have you prepared for us?

Where will you strike with chemical weapons?

At the maternity hospital in Mariupol? At the church in Kharkiv? At the Okhmatdyt Children's Hospital?

Or at laboratories, most of which have remained since Soviet times and are engaged in ordinary science. Ordinary!

NOT military technology.

We are adequate people. I am the President of an adequate country, an adequate nation. And the father of two children.

And no chemical or any other weapons of mass destruction were developed on my land.

The whole world knows that.

YOU know that.

And if YOU do something like that against US, you will get the most severe sanctions response.

Ukrainians! Our defenders!

I have signed several important decrees.

About awarding the title of Hero of Ukraine to thirteen of our defenders:

Lieutenant Colonel Litun Andriy Mykolayovych. Posthumously. He died covering our troops and heroically restraining the enemy's offensive.

Captain Korpan Oleksandr Bohdanovych. Posthumously. He saved our soldiers and civilian houses when he took the falling aircraft away from them.

Junior Lieutenant Blokha Yuriy Ihorovych. Posthumously. In the battles in the Mykolaiv region he heroically protected brothers-in-arms, saving their lives.

Senior Sergeant Ivashko Andriy Oleksandrovych. Posthumously. During the rocket fire, he personally provided information about the enemy's actions at the cost of his own life.

Junior Sergeant Volkov Yevhen Volodymyrovych. Posthumously. For courage and heroism during the evacuation of the wounded in the Donetsk region, for saving our military.

Major General Nikoliuk Viktor Dmytrovych. He skillfully led the defense in the north-eastern direction and managed to prevent the capture of Chernihiv.

Colonel Khoda Leonid Oleksiyovych. During the war, under his command, more than 50 enemy vehicles were destroyed.

Lieutenant Colonel Ponomarenko Vyacheslav Anatoliyovych. Thanks to his actions, a significant number of enemy’s equipment and soldiers in the city of Hostomel were destroyed.

Lieutenant Colonel Yakovenko Oleksandr Oleksiyovych. He withdrew his units from the enemy artillery fire, thanks to which he saved personnel and continued to successfully defend the Donetsk region.

Major Bova Yevhen Petrovych. For the heroic defense of Mariupol and holding positions under constant enemy attacks.

Captain Boyechko Vasyl Vasyliovych. For the extremely successful destruction of enemy equipment and manpower.

Sergeant Moroz Oleh Romanovych. Thanks to his heroic deeds, the enemy's offensive in the Luhansk region was stopped.

Sailor Samofalov Valeriy Mykhailovych. In one battle, for the first time in the history of this war, he shot down three enemy helicopters.

I also signed a decree awarding orders for personal courage to 39 national guardsmen, 31 policemen (9 posthumously), 14 border guards (4 posthumously) and 23 employees of the State Emergency Service.

Today the rank of Brigadier General is awarded to:

Nechayev Oleh Oleksandrovych. For the successful defense of the Kyiv region.

Lishchynsky Vladyslav Vatslavovych. For extremely successful actions against the enemy in the Kherson region.

Hutsol Volodymyr Volodymyrych. For the successful destruction of enemy airborne troops in Vasylkiv.

Demyanchyk Hryhoriy Petrovych. For the successful organization of personnel training for our military units.

And finally.

Discussions on Ukraine's future in the EU continue today and tomorrow in Europe.

I believe that our people, our state, our army did everything for us to be welcome there. As equals. For us to be invited there.

This is the final exam for Europe.

Among the leaders of the states there are those who support us. And there are also those who support only themselves.

But we see how the nations of all European countries treat us. And this is the main thing.

Because I know for sure - if people decided on our membership in the EU, they would definitely choose the people of Ukraine.

Today, when I see the support of the people of each country in the squares of European capitals, I know that the Ukrainian people are already in the European Union.

And politicians... I'm sure they will adjust to that.

Preferably faster.

Information about the victims of yesterday's bombing of the maternity hospital and the children's hospital in Mariupol appeared last night. We lost three people, including a child, a girl. The number of wounded is 17. These are children, women, medical workers.

You know, this topic was mentioned on Russian television. It was on their talk show. But not a word of truth was said. The Russians were lied to that there had been no patients in the hospital and no women or children in the maternity hospital. The Russians were lied to that "nationalists" had allegedly taken up positions there. They lie confidently, as always.

War crimes are impossible without the propagandists who cover them up. I want to tell them one thing: you will bear responsibility just as all those who give orders to bomb civilians. We will find all the property of the propagandists and their associates. We will do our best to confiscate it wherever it is. You love a rich life. Love prosperous countries. You will not have this anymore. And this is just the beginning.

You will definitely be prosecuted for complicity in war crimes. And then, it will definitely happen, you will be hated by Russian citizens. Everyone whom you have been deceiving constantly, daily, for many years in a row. When they feel the consequences of your lies in their wallets, in their shrinking possibilities. In the stolen future of Russian children.

War is never isolated. It always beats both the victim and the aggressor. The aggressor just realizes it later. But it always realizes and always suffers.

Today, we are once again providing humanitarian corridors for our cities. The buses have already departed, the trucks are already on their way - with food, water, medicine.

Mariupol, Volnovakha, Izyum, Sumy and the region. Cities and towns of the Kyiv region - Bucha, Borodyanka, Irpin, Hostomel... My heart is broken by what the invaders did to our cities, to our state! And by what they want to do to our people who need urgent help.

Russian troops have already created a humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine. But for them it is part of the plan. They want to humiliate our people. Make them take bread and water from the hands of the invaders standing on their knees. So that Ukrainians can save their lives just by going to the occupied territories or to Russia. That's why they are blocking Mariupol, that's why they are blocking Volnovakha, blocking other cities.

The invaders specially organize this torture to give their propaganda channels new material. Just for that. Monsters.

Despite everything, updated information was received every hour yesterday about people whom we managed to evacuate to the free territory of Ukraine. In total, more than 60,000 of our citizens were rescued yesterday plus those who did not have time until night and continued the evacuation in the morning.

I spoke today, in particular about that, with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz. About the torture of our cities, our people. I spoke with French President Macron.

I felt in a conversation with Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Boris Johnson that our anti-war coalition will soon become much stronger. Consequently, the pressure on Russia for peace will also be much stronger. For us, specifics in relations with world leaders, with European leaders are very important.

We are really fighting for our independence! For freedom, for equality for all on the continent! That is why we want to see from partners the decisions based on reality, not on declarations or abstract considerations.

These days, the EU leaders will convene to discuss Russia's war against Ukraine. To discuss our application for EU membership. We are waiting for a concrete signal. We look forward to strong support. Because it will be fair, real, human, European.

We know exactly the position of every leader. We know exactly who stands with us and who thinks that the European Union is just accounting, profits, expenses and nothing more. We will work, we will persuade. Life will convince them.

Ukrainians! Our defenders!

We all have been defending our state for the 15th day. We endured. The Ukrainian army is repelling attacks in key directions. Thanks to our military, National Guards, border guards, police, territorial defense and everyone who joined the defense of the state, we have not become slaves, and will never become!

Because this is our spirit, this is our destiny. Pride for our Armed Forces of Ukraine is boundless!

After the war, after our victory, we will rebuild everything that was destroyed.

Very quickly and with a very high quality. A special state program for reconstruction will be created for each affected city. I have already instructed the government to start the elaboration.

Chernihiv and Sumy, Okhtyrka and Zhytomyr, Izyum, Mariupol and all our beautiful cities to which evil has come will not see a single trace of the Russian invasion.

The best architects, the best companies, the best projects. For every city! I want to say this on the example of Kharkiv. Our Kharkiv, which is now experiencing the worst suffering since World War II.

Saltivka, Oleksiivka... Perhaps most Ukrainians know nothing about these names. But the people of Kharkiv will hear. Freedom Square will be such that everyone, all of us, all Europeans will be there! Poltava Way, Belgorod Highway, Myronosytska Street, Regional Children's Hospital, Kharkiv Oncology Center, Karazin University, Labor Palace, Korolenko Library.

We will rebuild everything! I promise you personally. Kharkiv residents will see that Ukraine stands with them. And it really does.

Today is the day that defines everything. Defines who is on whose side. Russian bombs fell on a hospital and maternity hospital in Mariupol. Children's hospital. Maternity hospital that is functioning! Buildings are destroyed. As of now, there are 17 wounded. Disassembly of the debris is still ongoing. People began to hide from the air threat in time.

From 500 kg aviation bombs dropped by the invaders on Ukrainian cities. Many times already.

Children's hospital. Maternity hospital. What did they threaten the Russian Federation with? What kind of country is this - the Russian Federation, which is afraid of hospitals and maternity hospitals and destroys them? Were there little Banderivtsi? Or were pregnant women going to fire at Rostov? Did someone in the maternity hospital abuse Russian-speakers? What was that? Was it the denazification of the hospital?

It is beyond atrocities already. Everything that the invaders are doing to Mariupol is beyond atrocities already. Europeans! Ukrainians! Mariupol residents! Today, we must be united in condemning this war crime of Russia, which reflects all the evil that the invaders brought to our land.

All destroyed cities. What they did to Volnovakha, Kharkiv, Izyum, Okhtyrka, Chernihiv, Borodyanka, Hostomel, Zhytomyr and dozens of other Ukrainian cities, which never posed any threat to the Russian Federation.

Destroyed hospitals. Destroyed schools, churches, houses. And all the people killed. All the children killed.

The air bomb on the maternity hospital is the final proof. Proof that the genocide of Ukrainians is taking place.

Europeans! You won’t be able to say that you didn't see what happened to Ukrainians, what happened to Mariupol residents. You saw. You know.

Therefore, you must increase sanctions against Russia so that it no longer has any opportunity to continue this genocide.

You must put pressure on Russia to force it to sit down at the negotiating table and end this brutal war.

Moscow knows very well that Mariupol is also the Donetsk region. We have heard so much from Russia about the inhabitants of the Donetsk region. So many accusations, so many demands... And now we see how Russia actually treats the residents of the Donetsk region. Treats ordinary people who live in the houses of Mariupol, work at the enterprises of the city of Mariupol, are treated in hospitals of Mariupol and give birth to children, imagine, people like you give birth to children in the maternity hospitals of Mariupol.

We have not done and never would have done anything similar to this war crime to any of the cities of the Donetsk, Luhansk or any other region. To any of the cities on earth. Because we are people. And you?

I spoke today with European Council President Charles Michel and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen. We also worked and spoke with Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi, with Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Boris Johnson. Thank you for your support, Boris.

The partners are fully informed about what is happening in our Mariupol. And about the situation in all other regions of Ukraine, where hostilities continue. We are working to make Russia feel the consequences of its actions. We are doing everything to finally secure our sky. I am grateful to the vast majority of Ukrainians who support this position. Those who collect signatures, who convince their acquaintances in the West, write on social networks, organize rallies.

Together we must return courage to some Western leaders. So that they finally do what they had to do on the first day of the invasion. Either close the Ukrainian sky from Russian missiles and bombs, or give us fighter jets so that we can do everything ourselves. A pause without a decision has become simply deadly.

Today we managed to organize the work of three humanitarian corridors. From the city of Sumy, from the cities and towns of the Kyiv region and from Enerhodar.

In total, about 35,000 people were rescued. We will continue tomorrow. We are preparing six corridors. We pray that people will be taken out of Mariupol, Izyum, Volnovakha, etc. Taken to safe cities of our free Ukraine.

And I am sure that every Ukrainian whose help these people need will do everything possible to make them feel our care. Until they can return home.

And finally. Every year on March 9, the winners of the Shevchenko Prize are announced. Our national award for the most significant contribution to the preservation and development of the Ukrainian spirit, our national culture.

I believe that our traditions must be observed during martial law and the fierce battles for our freedom. We must not betray them so that we preserve all ours, Ukrainian, completely while we are heading to victory. While we are heading to peace.

The decree was signed. Now I look forward to meeting the winners. But after the victory. After the victory of Ukraine.

Today we have important news. The United States has taken a step that will significantly weaken the invaders. It will make them pay for aggression and be responsible for the evil they have done. For all the evil. America bans imports of oil from Russia, petroleum products, gas, coal. Prohibits US citizens from any investment in Russia's fuel and energy sector.

I am grateful personally to President of the United States Biden for this decision. For this leadership. For this most powerful signal to the whole world. It is very simple: every penny paid to Russia turns into bullets and projectiles that fly to other sovereign states.

Either Russia will respect international law and will not wage wars, or it will not have the money to start wars. Another gas station will be found. But it's not just about the money. A ban on oil imports to the United States will weaken the terrorist state economically, politically and ideologically. Because it is about freedom, about the future. About where the world will go.

The United Kingdom is also banning the import of oil and petroleum products from Russia.

I am grateful to Prime Minister Boris Johnson for the principled position you expect from the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in difficult times.

Speaking today in the British Parliament, I mentioned other difficult times. Other, yet similar. 1940, when tyranny threatened what it considered a small island. And it was sure that the island would not withstand brutal blows, bombings and a blockade.

And it turned out that the island could do more than that tyranny. Because it had wisdom. And endurance. And friends. And strength. And it believed in the future, the future of its own and the future of freedom in Europe.

As we believe. As we fight. And as we will win.

Look: the world does not believe in the future of Russia, does not talk about it. Not a word, not a prospect. They understand everything. They talk about us. They help us. They are preparing to support our reconstruction.

After the war. Because everyone saw that for the people who defend themselves so heroically, this "after the war" will surely come.

There will be a new Marshall Plan for Ukraine. The West will form this support package. The British Prime Minister said this today. A man of his word, a sincere friend of Ukraine.

We are already expecting tough decisions from the European Union. Sanctions. Against Russia. For this war. For this aggression, which its authors will regret. They will. For sure. That is why it is so important that the Russian leadership realizes that the world will follow the example of the United States, Great Britain, the European Union, Canada, Australia, Japan and other free countries.

So, the world cannot be fooled. Sanctions cannot be avoided.

I am grateful to those Russians who support us, take to the streets and fight. They are fighting daily for us and for themselves. Because they are fighting for peace.

The war must end. We need to sit down at the negotiating table - honest, substantive, in the interests of the people, not obsolete murderous ambitions.

I spoke today with Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of the Netherlands. We have a new page in relations with the Netherlands. Thank you for your support. With Prime Minister of Israel Bennett. With Prime Minister of Luxembourg Bettel and President of France Macron. We have support. We have an understanding.

You may have seen in the news today the story that the United Nations allegedly does not consider the Russian invasion a war. I know this outraged many, and not only in Ukraine.

I am grateful to our team. We made everything clear and quickly received assurances: there will be no lies in the UN structures. There will be no playing along with the aggressor. The word "war" will be heard on this site. Because that is the truth. We will not allow anyone in the world to ignore the suffering and murder of our people, our children.

Today, when I spoke to the British Parliament, the scariest number was 50. 50 Ukrainian children killed in 13 days of war. And in an hour it was 52. 52 children. I will never forgive that. And I know that you will never forgive the invaders.

Like Kharkiv, Mariupol and all other cities. In the evening, they fired a missile at Korbutivka in the Zhytomyr region. Destroyed the dormitory.

How could an ordinary dormitory threaten Russia? What geopolitical interests of the nuclear state were threatened by it? Eternal memory to all the people who were killed by these savages.

Today we managed to organize a humanitarian corridor from the city of Sumy to Poltava.

Hundreds of people were saved. The humanitarian cargo was delivered. But that's only one percent of what needs to be done, of what people, blocked Ukrainians expect. We are ready. Our cargo is ready. Our transport is ready. But ... savages - they are not ready. They fire at evacuation routes. They block the delivery of essential products and medicines to people. What do they want? They want Ukrainians to take it from the hands of the invaders. This is torture. Deliberate. Systematic. Organized by their state. Foreign to us. And ruthless for everyone, even for its citizens.

Oleshky in the Kherson region. Berdyansk and Melitopol in the Zaporizhzhia region. All the cities where Ukrainians are resisting, where they are protesting against the invaders... Know: we stand with you. We are grateful. The cargo will still go. No matter how many bullets stop them. Humanitarian corridors will still work. And only time separates you from freedom. Short time. Believe it. I believe. And I really want that.

Mr. Speaker! Mr. Prime Minister! Members of the government, parliament, lords.

Ladies and gentlemen!

I’m addressing all the people of the United Kingdom. All the people of Great Britain. Great people. With a great history. I’m addressing you as a citizen, as President of a great country as well. With a great dream. And a great struggle. I want to tell you about our 13 days. 13 days of fierce war, which we did not start and did not want. But we are waging it.

Because we do not want to lose what we have, what is ours - Ukraine. Just as you did not want to lose your island when the Nazis were preparing to start the battle for your great power, the battle for Britain.

13 days of our defense.

On the first day at 4 am, cruise missiles were fired at us. So that everyone woke up - we, the children, all of us, living people, all of Ukraine. And we haven't slept since. We all took up arms becoming a large army.

The next day we fought off attacks in the air, on land and at sea. And our heroic border guards on Zmiinyi Island in the Black Sea told everyone about the end of the war. Namely: where the enemy will go in the end. When a Russian ship demanded that our guys lay down their weapons, they answered him... As firmly as one cannot say in the parliament. And we felt the power. Great power of our people who will persecute the invader to the end.

On the third day, Russian troops openly fired at people and apartment buildings without hiding. Used artillery, air bombs. And it finally showed us, showed the world who is who. Who are great people and who are just savages.

On the fourth day, when we have already begun to take dozens of prisoners, we have not lost our dignity. We didn’t abuse them. We treat them like people. Because we remained human on the fourth day of this shameful war.

On the fifth day, the terror against us has already become outright. Against cities, against small towns. Ruined districts. Bombs, bombs, bombs, again bombs on houses, on schools, on hospitals. This is genocide. Which did not break us. It mobilized each and every one of us. And it gave us a sense of great truth.

On the sixth day, Russian missiles hit Babyn Yar. This is the place where the Nazis executed 100,000 people during World War II. 80 years later, Russia killed them for a second time.

On the seventh day, we realized they were destroying even the churches. Using bombs! Rockets again. They do not know the holy and great as we know.

On the eighth day, the world saw Russian tanks firing at a nuclear power plant. The largest in Europe. And the world began to understand that this is terror against all. This is a great terror.

On the ninth day, we listened to a meeting of NATO countries. Without the desired result for us. Without courage. That's how we felt - I don't want to offend anyone - we felt that alliances don't work. They can't even close the sky. That is why security guarantees in Europe must be built from scratch.

On the tenth day, unarmed Ukrainians protested everywhere in the occupied cities. Stopping armored vehicles with bare hands. We have become unbreakable.

On the eleventh day, when residential areas were already bombed, when everything was destroyed by explosions, when children were evacuated from a damaged children's oncology hospital... We realized: Ukrainians became heroes. Hundreds of thousands of people. Entire cities. Children, adults - all.

On the twelfth day, when the losses of the Russian army have already exceeded 10,000 killed, the general also appeared in this number. And this gave us confidence: for all crimes, for all shameful orders there will still be responsibility before the International Court or Ukrainian weapons.

On the thirteenth day, a child died in Russian-occupied Mariupol. Died of dehydration. They do not allow food or water to people. They just blocked it - and people are in the basements. I think everyone hears: people don't have water there!

In 13 days of the Russian invasion, 50 children were killed. 50 great martyrs. This is dreadful! This is emptiness. Instead of 50 universes that could live, they took them away. They just took them away.

Great Britain!

Ukraine did not strive for that. It did not seek greatness. But it became great during these days of this war.

Ukraine that saves people despite the terror of the invaders. Defends freedom despite the blows of one of the world's largest armies. Defends despite the open sky. Still open to Russian missiles, aircraft, helicopters. "To be or not to be?" - You know this Shakespearean question well.

13 days ago, this question could still be raised about Ukraine. But not now. Obviously, to be. Obviously, to be free. And if not here, where should I remind you of the words that Great Britain has already heard. And which are relevant again.

We shall not give up and shall not lose!

We shall go the whole way.

We shall fight in the seas, we shall fight in the air, we shall defend our land, whatever the cost may be.

We shall fight in the woods, in the fields, on the beaches, in the cities and villages, in the streets, we shall fight in the hills ... And I want to add: we shall fight on the spoil tips, on the banks of the Kalmius and the Dnieper! And we shall not surrender!

Of course, with your help, with the help of the civilization of great countries. With your support, for which we are grateful and on which we rely. And I am especially grateful to you, Boris, my friend!

Increase sanctions against the terrorist state. Recognize it as a terrorist state finally. Find a way to make our Ukrainian sky safe. Do what you can. Do what you have to. Do what the greatness of your state and your people obliges to.

We always celebrate this holiday. The holiday of spring. We congratulate Ukrainian women, our girls, wives, mothers.

Always.

But not today.

Today, I just can't tell you the traditional words. I just can't congratulate you. I can’t. When there are so many deaths. When there is so much grief. When there is so much suffering.

When the war continues. A full-scale terrorist war against our people. The people of Ukraine.

The invaders bombed Sumy again. With air bombs. Our peaceful city that has never threatened Russia in its history! Good, quiet, soulful Sumshchyna! Which is turned into hell.

Mariupol. Peaceful and hard-working city without any internal malice. It was surrounded. Blocked. And is being deliberately exhausted. Deliberately tortured. The invaders deliberately cut off communication. Deliberately block the delivery of food, water supply. Turn off the electricity.

In Mariupol, for the first time in dozens of years, perhaps for the first time since the Nazi invasion, a child died of dehydration.

Hear me, today, dear partners!

A child died of dehydration. In 2022!

We have been fighting for the thirteenth day. We destroy the invaders wherever we can. Everywhere. But there is a sky. Hundreds of Russian cruise missiles. Hundreds of fighter jets of the invaders. Hundreds of helicopters. Yes, we destroy them.

Russia has not lost as much aircraft in the past 30 years as in these 13 days in Ukraine.

But they still have enough machinery to kill. There are still enough missiles for terror. They still have enough 500 kg bombs to drop them on us, ordinary people. On Chernihiv and Kyiv. Odesa and Kharkiv. Poltava and Zhytomyr. Dozens and dozens of Ukrainian cities. On millions of peaceful Ukrainian people.

It has been 13 days of promises. 13 days when we are told that there will soon be help in the sky. There will be planes. They will be handed over to us...

The blame for every death of every person in Ukraine from air strikes and in blocked cities, of course, lies with the Russian state, the Russian military, those who give and those who carry out criminal orders, who violate all the rules of warfare, who deliberately exterminate the Ukrainian people.

The fault lies with the invaders. But the responsibility for this lies also with those who have not been able to make an obviously necessary decision somewhere in the West, somewhere in the offices for 13 days. Those who have not yet secured the Ukrainian sky from Russian murderers.

Those who did not save our cities from air strikes. From these bombs, missiles. Although they can.

Those who do not help in lifting the blockade.

Hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people in the cities are on the verge of life and death. Literally.

Not as it sounds in the comments of politicians about providing Ukraine with vital combat aircraft. Vital missile defense.

Vitally important!

We have heard many assurances and seen many agreements. In particular, on the creation of humanitarian corridors. To save our citizens in Mariupol. But they didn't work. All of them didn’t work. Yet. And I have no more time to wait. We do not have. Mariupol doesn’t have time to wait.

It is the invaders who want our people to die. Not us. We sent columns with humanitarian aid to Mariupol. Everything necessary is there! We sent vehicles to rescue people. Drivers understand everything. They are heroes. Brave people! They understand that Russian troops can simply destroy these vehicles on the road. Just as they did, killing people who were just trying to get to a safe territory from the war zone.

But if you fire at these vehicles, these people, you should know that it will be before the eyes of the whole world.

Everyone will be witnesses. And everyone will testify.

When everyone, I repeat this, everyone who gives and fulfills inhuman orders will be severely judged and convicted.

We have seen the concrete consent of the Russian side to organize an evacuation corridor from the city of Sumy. And not just for our people. For hundreds of foreigners. Citizens of India, China. These are students who studied in Sumy.

You know, I was told that the Red Cross, the International Red Cross, forbids us to use the emblem on vehicles carrying out humanitarian missions. The Red Cross prohibits it as if it is their property.

And this is indicative. This says a lot about the fact that some people, very influential, have decided to give up Ukrainians.

But we will not allow it. And I will not allow it.

Our friends. They are next to us.

I will appeal directly to the nations of the world if the leaders of the world do not make every effort to stop this war, this genocide.

Of course, we continue to talk to our partners, to the leaders, parliamentarians of all countries who know how to help Ukraine. We have a very busy negotiation period.

I spoke with Lithuanian President Gitanas Nausėda. The people of Lithuania always stand by Ukrainians in this struggle. We feel this help and appreciate it.

I spoke with President of the European Council, our friend Charles Michel. I also spoke with Prime Minister of India, Mr. Modi.

But there are things that are not decided in negotiations, that depend not directly on us, but on humanity, which must win in the leading capitals, must overcome fear, must overcome any benefits.

And then we will see that the Ukrainian sky is safe and the Ukrainian cities are unblocked.

We can do this together as people of the world. And if the world stands aloof, it will lose itself. Forever. Because there are unconditional values. The same for everyone. First of all, this is life. The right to life for everyone.

This is exactly what we are fighting for in Ukraine. Very fiercely, together with our military. This is exactly what these weak invaders want to deprive us of.

This is exactly what the whole world must protect

Monday. Evening. You know, we used to say: Monday is a hard day. There is a war in the country. So every day is Monday.

And now we are used to the fact that every day and every night are like that.

Today is the 12th. 12th evening of our struggle. Our defense.

We are all on the ground, we are all working.

Everyone is where they should be. I am in Kyiv. My team is with me. The territorial defense is on the ground. The servicemen are in positions. Our heroes! Doctors, rescuers, transporters, diplomats, journalists...

Everyone. We are all at war. We all contribute to our victory, which will definitely be achieved. By force of arms and our army. By force of words and our diplomacy. By force of spirit, which the first, the second and each of us have.

Take a look at our country today.

Chaplynka, Melitopol, Tokmak, Novotroitske and Kherson. Starobilsk. Everywhere people defended themselves, although they do not have weapons there. But these are our people, and that's why they have weapons.

They have courage. Dignity. And hence the ability to go out and say: I'm here, it's mine, and I won't give it away. My city. My community. My Ukraine.

Every Ukrainian man and woman who protested against the invaders yesterday, today and will protest tomorrow are heroes.

We shout at the invaders together with you. We stand in the squares and streets with you. We are not afraid with you when the invaders open fire and try to drive everyone away.

YOU do not back down.

WE do not back down.

And the one who repeated: "We are one people" - certainly did not expect such a powerful reaction.

In the south of our country, such a national movement has unfolded, such a powerful manifestation of Ukrainianness that we have never seen in the streets and squares there. And for Russia it is like a nightmare.

They forgot that we are not afraid of paddy wagons and batons. We are not afraid of tanks and machine guns. When the main thing is on our side, truth. As it is now.

Mariupol and Kharkiv, Chernihiv and Sumy. Odesa and Kyiv. Mykolaiv. Zhytomyr and Korosten. Ovruch. And many other cities.

We know that hatred that the enemy brought to our cities with shelling and bombing will not remain there. There will be no trace of it. Hatred is not about us. Therefore, there will be no trace of the enemy. We will rebuild everything. We will make our cities destroyed by the invader better than any city in Russia.

Enerhodar. Chornobyl. And other places where barbarians just don't understand WHAT they want to capture. WHAT they want to control. Your work, your hard work on critical objects is a real feat. And we see it. We are sincerely grateful for it.

The Ukrainian army holds positions. Well done! It inflicts extremely painful losses on the enemy. Defends. Counterattacks. If necessary - can take revenge. Necessarily. For every evil. For every rocket and bomb. For each destroyed civilian object.

Today in Makariv, Kyiv region, they fired at the bread factory. For what? The old bread factory! Think about it - to fire at the bread factory. Who should you be to do that?

Or to destroy another church - in the Zhytomyr region. The Church of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin built in 1862.

These are NOT people.

There was an agreement on humanitarian corridors.

Did it work? Russian tanks worked instead. Russian "Grads". Russian mines. They even mined the road, which was agreed to transport food and medicine for people and children in Mariupol.

They even destroy buses that have to take people out. But ... At the same time, they are opening a small corridor to the occupied territory. For several dozen people. Not so much to Russia, as to propagandists. Directly to their TV cameras. Like, that's the one who saves. Just cynicism. Just propaganda. Nothing more. No humanitarian sense.

The third round of negotiations in Belarus took place today. I would like to say - the third and final. But we are realists. So we will talk. We will insist on negotiations until we find a way to tell our people: this is how we will come to peace.

Exactly to peace.

We must realize that every day of struggle, every day of resistance creates better conditions for us. Strong position to guarantee our future. In peace. After this war.

Apart from the dead people and the destroyed cities, the war leaves destroyed the aspirations that once seemed very important, but now ... You don't even mention them.

Almost three years ago, as soon as the election took place, we entered this building, this office, and immediately began planning our move.

I dreamed of moving from Bankova. Together with the government and parliament. To unload the center of Kyiv and in general - to move to a modern, transparent office - as befits a progressive democratic European country.

Now I will say one thing: I stay here.

I stay in Kyiv.

On Bankova Street.

I’m not hiding.

And I'm not afraid of anyone.

As much as it takes to win this Patriotic War of ours.

Today I signed a decree to present state awards of Ukraine to 96 Ukrainian heroes - our military.

Including…

The Order of Bohdan Khmelnytsky of the second degree is awarded to:

Major Oleksandr Oleksandrovych Sak. Commander of the mechanized battalion who entered the battle with the battalion tactical group of the enemy and won thanks to a rational approach to combat and non-standard tactics.

Captain Rostyslav Oleksandrovych Sylivakin. Commander of the mechanized battalion, which successfully fought the overwhelming forces of the enemy, liberating Ukrainian towns and villages in the Sumy region.

The Order of Bohdan Khmelnytsky of the third degree is awarded to:

Lieutenant Ihor Serhiyovych Lozovyi. Acting as part of the group, he stopped a column of enemy vehicles numbering about 150 units, which was moving in the direction of the Zhytomyr-Kyiv route. Destroyed.

Lieutenant Vitaliy Viktorovych Poturemets. He showed exemplary courage and composure in the battle, destroying a column of enemy equipment near the city of Kyiv. He was wounded.

The Order "For Courage" of the third degree is awarded to:

Master Sergeant, Commander of the Automobile Platoon Valentyn Viktorovych Baryliuk. Thanks to his brave actions and personal determination, the tank unit received fuel in time and left the encirclement, destroying the enemy on the way.

All 96 of our heroes are like these five!

Our gratitude to all the military.

Our gratitude to the Armed Forces of Ukraine!

Our gratitude is boundless.

Peaceful people of a belligerent state!

We have been defending ourselves against the invasion for 12 days already. We never wanted this war. But it was brought to us. We never dreamed of killing. But we have to knock out the enemy. From our land and from our lives.

We have to endure what no other European nation has seen in 80 years.

And it is on our land that it is decided whether someone else in Europe will fall victim to the same aggression.

I’m telling this to the leaders of the world and I hear that they agree.

We decide the future of the continent. WIth our resistance. And our friends - with their help.

I spoke again with Polish President Andrzej Duda. They help us. Keep working.

I spoke with Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Boris Johnson and Prime Minister of Italy Mario Draghi. With President of France Emmanuel Macron and Prime Minister of India Modi.

I received very important signals, which, I'm sure, will only strengthen Ukraine.

Our theses in conversations with partners are absolutely logical. They are fair. Honest.

If the invasion continues and Russia does not abandon its plans against Ukraine, then a new sanctions package is needed. New sanctions, new sanction steps against war and for peace.

Boycott of Russian exports. In particular, the refusal of oil and petroleum products from Russia.

This can be called an embargo. Or just morality. When you refuse to give money to a terrorist. Boycott of imports to Russia. If they do not want to follow civilized rules, they should not receive goods and services from civilization. Let the war feed them.

The international community must act even more decisively.

When someone loses their mind, we have to lose fear and forget about commerce. We need to defend ourselves.

You have to be moral. Both states and companies.

We must fight against the inhuman force that wants to destroy humanity itself.

The success of the Ukrainian army. The will of the Ukrainian people.The principled nature of international sanctions. This is the way to peace.

At night the invaders fired at Mykolaiv. Right at the residential areas. Using rocket artillery.

They fired at Kharkiv, at residential areas of a peaceful city.

They fired at other cities of our state.

No military sense. Just terror.

Residents of Irpen, Bucha, Hostomel and many other towns and villages, which the invader managed to capture, are being held hostage. Temporarily. Until the invaders get punishment. And they will get it.

Our Armed Forces know how to do it.

The enemy is tired. Demoralized. They came to our land to look for something that has never been here: cowardice, consent to slavery.

Any normal person is afraid to look at burned houses. It is obvious. Destroyed panel high-rise buildings. Destroyed ordinary cars.

Missiles, air bombs, "Grads", mortars. Against people.

It feels like it's in another country. But this is in our country. In ours, not somewhere else. In ours.

Which has always wanted peace above anything else.

How many more deaths and losses are needed to secure the sky over Ukraine?

How do civilians in Kharkiv or Mykolaiv differ from Hamburg or Vienna?

We are waiting for a decision. Securing the sky.

Either with the power you have, or give us fighter jets and air defense systems that will provide us with the strength we need.

This is the help that the world should provide not just to Ukraine, but to itself. To prove: humanity will win. As soon as possible.

The Government of Ukraine is already working on how to restore our state after the victory.

How to give more strength to the country while we are fighting.

A special package of assistance to businesses and employees has been created.

Sole proprietors of the first and second groups are completely exempt from UST.

Enterprises and sole proprietors of the third group are exempt from paying UST for employees who were drafted into the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other defense formations. In particular, the territorial defense.

Exemption from land tax and rent for state and communal land in all areas where hostilities are taking place.

All this is during martial law and at least a year after its end.

The payment of taxes for all enterprises that are unable to pay them is postponed.

And this is only the first part of a large aid package. Government support.

All leaders of the central government have a clear task: to develop a system of action so that the recovery of Ukraine is rapid and focused only on people. First of all - on people.

For us all to return to peace, to normal work. When we return our land, return peace to our land.

I am grateful to all business owners and managers who continue to work and fulfill their obligations to their employees.

To pay salaries to people - even if the company does not work as before - is to protect Ukraine.

The state fulfills all its obligations.

Indexed pensions have already been provided to the people. The salary in the budget sphere is paid as it should be.

Ukrainians!

There are millions of us. And these are millions of ways to fight for our future. For our state. For our freedom. For our national flag. Blue and yellow. Not a tricolor. We defend our flag because it is our worldview.

Under the blue and yellow we gained victories at the Olympics. We unfurled this flag both in space and in Antarctica.

Under our national flag, our rescuers, firefighters, peacekeepers, medics and everyone else came to the aid of Turkey, Greece, Israel and Georgia, Afghanistan and Montenegro, India, Italy, the Congo and many other countries.

What we have never done under this flag is attacking other countries, seizing foreign lands, killing people, peaceful people of other nations.

We and terror are different universes.

That is why there is no blood on our flag. There are no and will never be black spots on it. There are no and will never be any swastikas on it. The Ukrainian flag is the land. Peaceful, fertile, golden and without tanks. This is the sky. Peaceful, clear, blue and without missiles. So it was. And so it will be.

I believe!

I know.

Kharkiv. A cruise missile strike. At the largest square of Europe. Freedom Square. Dozens of victims. This is what the price of freedom is. This is what the morning of the people of Ukraine is.

Ukrainian Kharkiv and Russian Belgorod have always been close cities. In many ways. Even the border between them was only conditional, only on maps, but not in the soul. Not in the soul. Now everything has changed. After the cruise missile that struck Kharkiv from Belgorod. The missile that hit Freedom Square. The face of our Kharkiv. This is terror against the city. There was no military target on the square. Just as in those residential areas of Kharkiv hit by rocket artillery. The rocket aimed at the central square is an outright, undisguised terror. No one will forgive. No one will forget.

This attack on Kharkiv is a war crime. This is state terrorism of the Russian Federation. After that, Russia is a terrorist state. Obviously. And it must be official. We call on all countries of the world to respond immediately and effectively to this criminal tactic of the aggressor and to declare that Russia is committing state terrorism. We demand full responsibility for terrorists in international courts.

Kharkiv and Kyiv are currently the most important targets for Russia. Terror is meant to break us. To break our resistance. They are heading to our capital, as well as to Kharkiv. Therefore, the defense of the capital today is the key priority for the state. All cities of Ukraine must do everything to stop the enemy. The military and civilian authorities of each city are responsible for this. But Kyiv is special. If we protect Kyiv, we will protect the state. This is the heart of our country. And it must keep beating. And it will keep beating. So that life triumphs.

Dear Kyiv residents! Defense of the capital is above all. That's why I decided to appoint a professional military person as the Head of the Kyiv City Military Administration for the period of war. To guarantee the defense of the city. To block the enemy's approaches to our capital. To ensure that the people of Kyiv have everything they need. The Head of the Military Administration will be General Mykola Mykolayovych Zhyrnov, who served as commander of the support forces. At a high level he organized the engineering support of combat operations of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in 2014-2015. He is currently a state expert of the Military Security Service at the National Security and Defense Council. Vitali Klitschko remains mayor of Kyiv. He will have his own sphere of responsibility. And now it is a joint work of the mayor and the Head of the Military Administration. After the war, we will return everything to its place in the capital.

Regarding our diplomats. Right now, our diplomats are implementing fair and absolutely necessary decisions in relation to those states that have betrayed their word and international law. We immediately recall the Ambassador from Kyrgyzstan for consultations. For justifying aggression against Ukraine. We immediately recall the Ambassador from Georgia. For the obstacles to volunteers who want to help us. For an immoral attitude towards sanctions.

And now I want to speak about those whose feat is an example of the highest moral strength. These are our doctors. You save people around the clock. Always. And now your work is one of the key lines of our defense. You keep it brilliant. Thousands of lives have been saved in 5 days. I am also grateful to everyone who provides our people with everything they need for life in these extremely difficult conditions. Food, energy, medicine. And I thank the ordinary people of Ukraine, who stop tanks with their bare hands, expel the invaders from administrative buildings by force of spirit and make their stay in Ukraine shameful. To prove that they are all strangers here. This is what the people's war is. This is what the people of Ukraine is.

Glory to Ukraine!

Good health to you, united country! I did not accidentally say "united". The seventh day of this terrible war began. A war we feel the same way. During this time we have had more unity than for over thirty years before. At first we were equally scared, then we felt equally painful. And now we do not care. Except for victory. Except for the truth. Except for peace. Except for the tranquility we want to achieve. Except for the lives of our people, for whom we are worried. Except for Ukraine. During this time, we have truly become one. We forgave each other a lot. We started loving each other. We help each other. We are worried for each other. Yesterday morning on Freedom Square we were all Kharkiv residents. Then the enemy destroyed us all by striking at residential buildings in Borodyanka. We were all bombed in Kyiv last night. And we all died again in Babyn Yar - from a missile strike. Although the whole world promises constantly - never again.

For any normal person who knows history, Babyn Yar is a special part of Kyiv. A special part of Europe. A place of prayer. A place of remembrance for the hundred thousand people killed by the Nazis. The place of old Kyiv cemeteries. Who should you be to make it a target for missiles? You are killing Holocaust victims for the second time. During the Soviet era, a TV center was built on the bones there. And also a sports complex. Outbuildings. They built a park there. To erase the true history of Babyn Yar. But why was it bombed? This is beyond humanity. Such a missile strike shows that for many people in Russia, our Kyiv is completely foreign. They know nothing about our capital. About our history. But they have an order to erase our history. Erase our country. Erase us all. On the first day of the war, Uman was brutally bombed, where hundreds of thousands of Jews come every year to pray. Then - Babyn Yar, where hundreds of thousands of Jews were executed. I am now addressing all the Jews of the world - don't you see what is happening? That is why it is very important that millions of Jews around the world do not remain silent right now. Nazism is born in silence. So shout about the killings of civilians. Shout about the killings of Ukrainians.

Last night and tonight they continued to bomb our cities. Bombs. Missiles. Artillery. Machine guns. Targeting peaceful people. Again. Targeting residential areas. Again. Mariupol, Kharkiv, Kyiv, Zhytomyr and other cities and towns of Ukraine. This cannot be explained by any human reason. Any reason of God. What then, if Babyn Yar was attacked? What other military facilities threaten Russia? What other “NATO bases”? Saint Sophia Cathedral? Lavra? St. Andrew's Church? Whatever they dream of there - damn them! Because God is with us!

During this time, we have united the European Union already on a new level. Higher than formal. Higher than interstate. At the level of ordinary people. Millions and millions of Europeans. From the Atlantic Ocean to the suburbs of Kharkiv, where fierce fighting continues. When the European Parliament stood and applauded us, our struggle, it was an assessment of our efforts. Our unity. Six days of war like thirty years. That is why the European Union answers "yes" to us. We have started a special accelerated accession procedure. Our diplomats and our friends unite the world for the sake of Ukraine and peace even more. Neutral Switzerland has supported EU sanctions against Russian oligarchs, officials, the state and companies. Once again: neutral Switzerland! So what do some other countries expect? Our anti-war coalition has already been joined by the countries that Moscow relied on a week ago. This is an extraordinary result. You can't stay neutral right now!

And what is the result for Russia? The flag of this state will no longer be seen in sports tournaments. Modern world culture will now be closed to them. Russian goods are being removed from store shelves around the world. Russian banks are disconnected from the global system. Russian citizens are losing their savings, losing all prospects. Russian mothers are losing their children in a completely foreign country. Think of this number: almost six thousand Russians died. Russian military. In six days of war. This is without counting the losses of the enemy last night. Six thousand. To get what? Get Ukraine? It is impossible. This is not to be changed by missiles. Bombs. Tanks. Any blows. We are on our native land. And for the war against us there will be an International Tribunal for them.

Ukrainians! Another night of Russia's full-scale war against us, against the people, has passed. Hard night. Someone spent that night in the subway - in a shelter. Someone spent it in the basement. Someone was luckier and slept at home. Others were sheltered by friends and relatives. We’ve hardly slept for seven nights. Or we sleep, but anxiously. My dears, the time will come when we will be able to sleep. But it will be after the war. After the victory. In a peaceful country, as we need. Which we have always appreciated. And which we have never destroyed. I ask all of you to take care of your loved ones. Take care of your brothers-in-arms. I admire you! The whole world admires you. From Hollywood stars to politicians. Today you, Ukrainians, are a symbol of invincibility. A symbol that people in any country can become the best people on earth at any moment.

Good health to you, dear Ukrainians! Strong and kind! But – kind NOT to enemies.

We are a nation that broke the enemy's plans in a week. Plans that have been built for years. Treacherously. Deliberately. With hatred of our country, of our people - of any people who have heart and freedom. But we stopped them. We beat them. Our military, border guards, territorial defense. Even ordinary farmers capture the Russian military on a daily basis. And they all say one thing: they don't know why they're here. Despite the fact that their quantity is ten times bigger, the morale of the enemy is deteriorating. More and more invaders are fleeing back to Russia. From us. From you. From all who drive out the enemy with javelins, stugnas, guns, tanks, planes, helicopters. Everything that shoots.

But Ukrainians are beating the enemy even without weapons. I sincerely admire the heroic civilians of Konotop, Bashtanka, Energodar, Melitopol. Other towns and villages. Who do not let the invaders in by blocking the roads. People come out in front of enemy vehicles. This is extremely dangerous. But this is brave. It is also salvation. I'm sure you saw a video from Melitopol where Ukrainians protested against Russians who entered our city. Temporarily. I am sure of this: if they entered somewhere, it is only temporarily. We’ll drive them out. With shame. As those people, ordinary people who drive the invaders out of grocery stores when the Russian soldiers are trying to find food do. These are not warriors of the superpower. These are confused children who were used. Take them home.

Ukrainians! Every invader should know: they will not get anything here. No one will be conquered. Even if they can accumulate more equipment and more people, it doesn't change anything for them. Wherever they enter. They will be destroyed everywhere. They will not have peace. They will have no food. They will not have a single quiet moment. The invaders will receive only a rebuff from Ukrainians. Fierce rebuff. Such a rebuff that they will forever remember that we will not give up what’s ours. That they will remember what the patriotic war is. Yes, for us it is a patriotic war. We remember how patriotic wars begin. And we know how they end. For the invaders.

Our army is doing everything to break the enemy completely. Almost nine thousand Russians were killed! In one week! In the Mykolaiv direction invaders have to take away the "two hundred" and "three hundred" with tens of helicopters. 19 years, 20 years ... What did they see in life, apart from this invasion? But most of them remain everywhere. Ukraine does not want to be covered with military corpses. Go home. Your whole army. Tell your commanders that you want to live. Not to die. To live. The war must be stopped and peace restored as soon as possible.

Today was, as usual, an active day of negotiations with the leaders of the member states of our anti-war coalition. I held talks with the heads of government of Norway and Israel. With the President of Kazakhstan. With the Emir of Qatar Tamim Bin Hamad al Thani. With President of the European Council Charles Michel. With Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau. With President of Poland Andrzej Duda. Brilliant result at the UN General Assembly. 141 countries supported the resolution, which calls on Russia to withdraw troops from Ukraine immediately. 141 states stand for us! And for Russia - only four states that voted against. Here is the list: North Korea, Eritrea, Syria and Belarus. This is the list. These are the friends. And there will be no others for the state that does not know how to live in peace.

Today I held a meeting with the heads of regions and cities of Ukraine. The new head of the Odesa regional state administration is already working. Maksym Marchenko. Military. Professional. Our guys on the ground are working hard to organize "green corridors". To take out civilians. To bring medicine. Volnovakha, cities of the Kyiv, Sumy, Kharkiv regions, south of Ukraine. This is very difficult. Extremely difficult. We are opposed by terror. But terror loses. Thanks to our heroes.

Today I signed a decree awarding the title of Hero of Ukraine to fifteen of our defenders:

Senior Lieutenant Maksym Vitaliyovych Bilokon. Posthumously. He took part in repelling the enemy's attack during the defense of Chernihiv, destroyed the enemy's subversive group and two enemy tanks.

Lieutenant Colonel Oleksandr Valeriyovych Kapichun. Posthumously. Thanks to his heroic actions, the enemy column was stopped, equipment and enemy soldiers were destroyed.

Soldier Oleksandr Volodymyrovych Lukyanovych. Posthumously. During the battle he neutralized up to three dozen units of enemy equipment. He was fatally wounded by an air strike.

Junior Sergeant Mykhailo Mykhailovych Nesolyony. Posthumously. He died in close combat with enemy forces while evacuating people.

Soldier Andriy Valeriyovych Nikonchuk. Posthumously. He protected the Kyiv HPP from Russian air raids and missile strikes.

Lieutenant Vitalii Romanoviyh Sapyl. Posthumously. Tank platoon commander. Neutralized three dozen enemy vehicles. Killed by an air strike.

Chief Sergeant Oleksiy Oleksandrovych Senyuk. Posthumously. He defended Chernihiv, destroyed two enemy IFVs and captured a T-72 tank. Killed by an air strike.

Lieutenant Vladyslav Petrovych Ukrainets. Posthumously. He covered the retreat of brothers-in-arms when the enemy attacked.

Major Stepan Ivanovych Choban. Posthumously. The pilot of the Su-27, distracted the enemy aircraft over Kropyvnytskyi.

Major Ihor Vasyliovych Mykhalchuk. Head of the tank battalion unit. Destroyed numerous enemy armored vehicles.

Colonel Serhiy Mykolayovych Musienko. Head of the Missile and Artillery Division. Inflicted devastating blows on the enemy in the Kharkiv direction.

Lieutenant Yevhen Mykhailovych Palchenko. Tank platoon commander. Covered the exit of the brigade from the encirclement.

Major Vladyslav Yuriyovych Prokopenko. Head of the tank battalion. Withdrew personnel and equipment from the encirclement without loss.

Lieutenant Colonel Pavlo Yuriyovych Fedosenko. Head of the unit of the 92nd brigade. For the effective defense of Kharkiv.

Senior Lieutenant Dmytro Petrovych Chavalakh. For heroic participation in the defense of the Kherson region.

All 40 million are like these fifteen heroes!

Unbreakable people of invincible Ukraine!

Exactly two years ago, the first case of COVID-19 was recorded in Ukraine. The first weeks of fighting it were extremely difficult. But we were united, and therefore strong, and therefore we withstood. Exactly a week ago, Ukraine was attacked by another virus. Another disease. By those who suffer from severe annexation and occupation of foreign lands. One week ago, at 4 am, Russia invaded our independent Ukraine, our land. Acute fit of aggression, megalomania, delusion of persecution. Heavy psychological complexes and as a result - missile systems. Rocket artillery. Tanks and other armored vehicles - simply like locusts. The first hours and days of full-scale war were extremely difficult. But we were united, and therefore strong, and therefore we withstood. And it will be so. And we will continue to stand.

We stand so that the invaders were forced to change tactics. Russia's missile and bomb strikes at Ukrainian cities are a confession that they could not do anything significant on land. All lines of our defense are preserved. The enemy has no success in any of the strategic directions. They are demoralized. They are doomed. Kyiv survived this night and withstood another missile and bomb strike. Our air defense worked. Kherson, Izyum, all other cities where the invaders carried out strikes from the air, did not give up anything. Chernihiv, Sumy, Mykolaiv hold the line. Odesa. They also want to destroy Odesa. But they will see only the bottom of the Black Sea. The target of Russia was the Assumption Cathedral in Kharkiv. One of the oldest Orthodox monuments of the city, monuments of Ukraine. During the war, the cathedral is a shelter for Kharkiv residents. Shelter for all people: believers and non-believers. For everyone, because everyone is equal. Holy place. Now it is damaged by war. They are not afraid of even that! They enjoy the fact that God does not give an instant rebuff. But he sees. And he answers. Answers so that you cannot hide. There is no such bunker to survive God's response. And we will restore the cathedral so that no trace of war remains there. And even if you destroy all our cathedrals and churches, you will not destroy our sincere faith in God, in Ukraine. Faith in people. We will restore every house, every street, every city. And we say to Russia: learn the words "reparations" and "contributions". You will repay everything you did against Ukraine. In full. And we will not forget those who perished, and God won’t.

You have come to destroy our cities. Destroy our people. Take away from us everything that is dear to us. You cut off electricity, water and heating to civilians in Ukraine. You leave people without food and medicine. You are shelling routes of possible evacuation. There is no weapon that you would not use against us, against the free citizens of Ukraine. And now you are telling your propagandists that you are going to send so-called humanitarian columns to Ukraine... Remember, godless men: when millions of people curse you, you have nothing to save yourself.

Ukrainians in all war-torn regions will receive everything they need from us. Coordination headquarters are working in full. Real humanitarian goods are on the way. Our government has already prepared a program of special assistance for all Ukrainians who have lost the opportunity to work. Now. Because of the war. Where there is fighting! Every employee, every sole proprietor, every citizen of ours, from whom Russia has taken away the opportunity to work, will receive six and a half thousand hryvnias without any conditions. I especially emphasize this for older Ukrainians. Despite the war, we ensure full payment of pensions. Indexed pensions. As it should be in accordance with the law. From March 1, pensions for Ukrainians are indexed by 14%. The money has already gone to the banks. All payments will be made in full.

Ukraine receives weapons from its partners on a daily basis. From real friends. More and more powerful weapons every day. Ukraine is already meeting foreign volunteers who are going to our country. The first of sixteen thousand. They are going to defend freedom. Defend life. For us. For all. And it will be successful. I'm sure.

We have survived in our history and on our land two world wars, three Holodomors, the Holocaust, Babyn Yar, the Great Terror, the Chornobyl explosion, the occupation of Crimea and the war in the east. We do not have a huge territory - from ocean to ocean, we do not have nuclear weapons, we do not fill the world market with oil and gas. But we have our people and our land. And for us - it's gold. That is what we are fighting for. We have nothing to lose but our own freedom and dignity. For us, this is the greatest treasure. They wanted to destroy us so many times. They failed. They wanted to wipe us off the face of the earth. They failed. They backstabbed us. And we are on our feet. They wanted us to be silent. But the whole world heard us. We've been through so much! And if someone thinks that, having overcome all this, Ukrainians - all of us - are scared, broken or will surrender, he knows nothing about Ukraine. And he has nothing to do in Ukraine. Go home. To your home. Protect Russian-speaking people. Not all over the world. In your country. There are almost 150 million of them. And here...

We have survived the night that could have stopped history. History of Ukraine. History of Europe.

Russian troops attacked the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. The largest in Europe. It alone could be like six Chornobyls. Russian tankers knew what they were firing at. Direct aiming at the station. This is terror of an unprecedented level.

There are 15 nuclear units in Ukraine. And the Russian servicemen have completely forgotten about Chornobyl. About this world tragedy.

Russian people, I want to address you. How is that even possible? Together in 1986 we struggled with the consequences of the Chornobyl disaster. You must remember the burning graphite scattered by the explosion. Victims. You must remember the glow above the destroyed power unit. You must remember the evacuation from Pripyat and the 30 km zone. How could you forget it? And if you have not forgotten, then you cannot be silent. You must tell your authorities, go to the streets and say that you want to live. To live on earth without radioactive contamination. Radiation does not know where the border of Russia is.

All night I was in touch with partners, with the leaders of other countries, so that the world could react. I felt that the world leaders were shocked. Britain is convening a UN Security Council over the attack. The IAEA is launching its 24-Hour Incident and Emergency Center. Immediate sanctions against the nuclear terrorist state are needed. Immediate closure of the sky over Ukraine is needed, because only this can guarantee that Russia will not strike at least missiles and air bombs at nuclear facilities.

I am grateful to our heroes from the National Guard who guarded the station and tried to stop the enemy. I am grateful to the rescuers who extinguished the fire. But a lot depends on the common people of Energodar. You understand the threat to the station better than anyone else. You live there. Next to it. And you see the invaders directly. Drive them away. Let them know that Energodar is Ukraine. That Ukraine is not a place for nuclear ashes.

Ukrainians! The enemy has brought the vast majority of its troops into the territory of our state. Almost the entire Russian army is thrown against our people. But the heroic resistance of Ukrainians has been saving our country from this invasion for the ninth day. Ukrainian cities have not seen such inhuman cruelty since the Nazi occupation. Chernihiv, Okhtyrka, Kharkiv, Mariupol. They are purposefully destroying civilian infrastructure. Destroying people. Residential neighborhoods. Just yesterday, Russian bombs killed 47 people in Chernihiv. Peaceful people. Kharkiv... Kharkiv is simply being destroyed by rocket artillery and air strikes. Russia. Destroys. Kharkiv. How could this happen? This morning in Zhytomyr, the rocket hit the school building. Hit children. This is the reality when “fraternal” Russia comes.

Yesterday, during talks in Belarus, we managed to agree on the creation of humanitarian corridors where people suffer the most. Today we will see whether the agreement works.

Our defense inflicts maximum losses on the enemy. Almost 9,200 invaders were killed. As of the morning of the ninth day of the war. We beat them near Mykolaiv. We beat them near Kharkiv. We beat them near Kyiv. The capital remains a key target for the invaders. But they will not break us, they will not break our statehood. Never. No matter what they do, they will still lose. Because we are at home. We are on our own land.

They are constantly preparing provocations. A provocation is being prepared in Kherson. They are going to put up a performance of a kind of rally for Russia. To do this, they brought strangers to the city. They are looking for local traitors. They want to make a TV picture as if Kherson is no longer Ukrainian. I want to remind you that this is how they started the so-called "DPR" and "LPR". You understand what happened to them later. This must be stopped. Kherson residents, show that this is your city. You can stop everything, any plan of the invaders. Do not listen to anyone - listen to your children, listen to your heart. You are Ukrainians.

I urge Kherson residents to get rid of any despair. Ukraine will not give up what is ours. We are fighting against a powerful enemy that outnumbers us. Which outnumbers us in the amount of equipment. But which is thousands of light years away from normal people who have dignity. Show it. Our national flag. Our national anthem. Our national spirit. Be sure to let the occupiers know that they can only be in Kherson temporarily. And they will never be able to own Kherson. Like any other city in Ukraine. Let the occupiers know that they can only stay in Kherson temporarily. And they will never be able to own your city, Kherson. Like any other Ukrainian city - the city of our state.

Great people of a great country!

A country of power. A country of freedom. The people of absolute moral leadership.

We have endured nine days of darkness. Nine days of evil. This is three times more than darkness and evil expected.

We responded to the invasion as we can in times of greatest danger. Responded with heroism. Solidarity. Mutual assistance. We responded in Ukrainian. So that the history of Europe will remember it forever. It will tell children about it. Show it to grandchildren.

The whole continent will know the city of Kharkiv. The city of Chernihiv. The city of Sumy. The city of Volnovakha. The city of Mariupol. The city of Mykolaiv. And many other of our beautiful cities. Living cities! Cities that have withstood the worst invasion since World War II.

I say this specifically as a fait accompli. Withstood. No matter what the situation is at the moment, strategically, everything is clear.

Ukrainians are united from Uzhhorod to Kharkiv, from Kyiv to Kherson. Ukrainians are chasing the enemy near Kyiv. They are beating him for Okhtyrka. Punishing him for Hostomel. They will take revenge for Kherson. Our Kherson! Ukrainian Kherson. Which they tried to humiliate today.

They failed. They were not allowed. Ukrainians have shown themselves.

They did not allow themselves to be deceived in a cheap cynical show. With a handout instead of help. With propaganda instead of sincerity.

Russian propagandists thought of our people as of themselves. And they saw that Kherson residents are proud. And respect themselves. Respect Ukraine.

I understand how difficult the decision is. When in the occupation they come out against armed enemies.

I feel how risky it is.

But I see how our people refuse to play by the rules of the invaders. How our people remain Ukrainians. How our people stay with our state, even temporarily finding themselves in the darkness.

If Russian politicians still have their eyes, they will be able to see what Ukraine is. What our freedom is.

The invaders thought they could turn off our television to Ukrainians. Our connection. They thought they could take away products, shut off the electricity. They thought it would force Ukrainians to submit.

But even if you deprive us of oxygen, we will breathe deeply, to say: get out of our land!

Even in complete darkness we see the truth.

And we will fight until it darkens in our eyes.

Because we are the warriors of light. And today no one on Earth will be able to say that this line is pathos.

The 9th day of the war. Many of us have a tradition to remember those who are not with us on the 9th day.

Eternal memory to everyone who died for Ukraine!

Unfortunately, today there is a complete impression that it is time to give a funeral repast for something else:

Security guarantees and promises.

Determination of alliances.

Values that seem to be dead for someone.

The NATO summit took place today. Weak summit. Confused summit.

Summit, which shows that not everyone considers the struggle for freedom to be Europe's number one goal.

All NATO intelligence offices are well aware of the enemy's plans. They also confirmed that Russia wants to continue the offensive. As best it can.

For 9 days we have seen a brutal war. They are destroying our cities. They are shelling our people, our children, and residential neighborhoods. Churches. Schools. They destroy everything that ensures a normal life. And they want to continue it.

Knowing that new strikes and casualties are inevitable, NATO deliberately decided NOT to close the sky over Ukraine.

We believe that NATO countries themselves have created a narrative that the closure of the sky over Ukraine would provoke Russia's direct aggression against NATO.

This is self-hypnosis. Of those who are weak, underconfident. Internally. Although they may have weapons many times more powerful than ours.

You had to think about people. About humanity itself.

And what did you think about at that summit?

All the people who will die starting from this day will also die because of you.

Because of your weakness. Because of your disunity.

All the Alliance has managed to do so far is to carry fifty tons of diesel fuel for Ukraine through its procurement system. Probably so that we can burn the Budapest Memorandum. To make it burn better.

But it is already burnt for us. In the fire of Russian troops.

Is this NATO we wanted? Is this the Alliance you were building?

Today, the Alliance's leadership gave the green light for further bombing of Ukrainian cities by refusing to make a no-fly zone.

You could close our sky. But…

I do not know who you can protect and whether you can protect NATO countries.

You will not be able to buy us off with liters of fuel for liters of our blood. Shed for our common Europe. For our common freedom. For our common future.

But I am also grateful to our country's friends in NATO. There are many countries of our friends, our partners - most of the powerful partners. Those who help our state no matter what. From the first day of the invasion. And I'm sure, until the victory.

And that's why we do NOT feel alone.

We continue to fight. We will protect our state. We will liberate our land.

Thanks to our heroes.

I awarded decorations and medals to 76 Ukrainian heroes for personal courage and selfless actions for our defense. Unfortunately, 37 of them are awarded posthumously.

I awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine to Lieutenant General Oleksandr Oleksiyovych Pavliuk, Commander of the Joint Forces Operation.

I conferred the military rank of Brigadier General on Colonel Volodymyr Vasyliovych Shvorak, Deputy Commander of the East Operational Command of the Land Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.

I conferred the military rank of Brigadier General of Justice on Colonel of Justice Serhiy Mykolayovych Melnyk, Head of the Military Law Institute of the Yaroslav the Wise National Law University.

I conferred the military rank of Brigadier General on Colonel Artem Yevhenovych Bohomolov, Deputy Commander of the West Operational Command.

I conferred the military rank of General on Valerii Fedorovych Zaluzhnyi, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.

It is already the tenth day of our national struggle. Sincere faith. And round-the-clock work.

The tenth day is like one infinitely long day. One infinitely long night that does not allow us to have a rest.

Today is Saturday. Saturday. This word means nothing during the war. Like Monday or Thursday or any other day. They all became the same.

We still protect the state. We still save people.

The country does not know weekends anymore. It doesn't matter what time it is. It doesn't matter what date it is. And it will be so until victory.

Late at night I spoke with French President Emmanuel Macron. And with President of Poland Andrzej Duda. Our interaction is constant. Our conversations are daily. I am immensely grateful to each of them. I am immensely grateful to Andrzej for his determination and devotion to our common cause. Protection of people. I am grateful to Andrzej's wife - Agata. They are friends whom I sincerely consider friends and sincerely wish to everyone.

We managed to prevent a humanitarian crisis at the border. We managed to organize the situation so that thousands and thousands of Ukrainian women and children were treated decently. Nobody asks about their nationality, faith or how much money they have. In fact, we no longer have a border with Poland. Because we are together on the side of good. We do not have time for borders.

I am sure that soon we will be able to tell our people: come back!

Come back from Poland, Romania, Slovakia and all other countries.

Come back, because there is no more threat.

We are already thinking about the future. For all Ukrainians. After the war. About how to revive our cities. How to revive the economy. I spoke with World Bank President David Malpass, IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva.

We have an agreement among the largest financial institutions to support Ukraine. There is already a decision on emergency aid and tens of billions of dollars for the reconstruction of Ukraine after the war.

And these are only the first decisions. I emphasize these are only the first. I spoke with Turkish President Erdoğan. I spoke with the leaders of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. I spoke with President of the European Council Charles Michel and President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen. The main topic is EU membership for Ukraine.

I am grateful to Europeans - hundreds of thousands of people in different cities of our continent. Bratislava, Vilnius, Frankfurt, Lyon, Paris, Tbilisi, Prague. They came out yesterday in support of Ukraine. In support of Europe. They came out for peace to be reached as soon as possible.

I am grateful to Americans for the unwavering bipartisan majority of ordinary people. We saw the poll. We saw the opinion of ordinary people in America who support ordinary people in Ukraine. Who demand tougher sanctions against Russia for aggression already now. Who support closing the sky now to save the lives of our people. 74 percent of Americans stand for the no-fly zone. 74! The vast majority. What else is needed to make a decision? We are sure that the result is similar in other democratic countries.

The Armed Forces of Ukraine bravely hold all key areas of our defense.

They are counterattacking the invaders near Kharkiv - defending the city. They are holding the line in Mykolaiv. Kyiv, Chernihiv region, Sumy region, Donbas. We inflict losses on the invaders they have not seen in their worst dreams.

The Russian army has not reached the planned frontiers. Yet it has reached almost 10 thousand Russian soldiers killed. 10 thousand. This is dreadful! 18-year-old, 20-year-old boys. Very young, almost children. Soldiers who were not even explained why they were going to fight. For what and why they are in a foreign land.

10 thousand. Russia could definitely give these people something else. Instead of death.

The Ukrainian people are resisting even where the invaders managed to pass. Unfortunately. But not for long. I admire every Ukrainian who is not silent. Who protests. Who takes the national flag and shows the Russian military that they will lose. They will definitely lose. Because it is impossible to win against people who stop military equipment without weapons in their hands. Who refuse to take anything from the hands of the invaders. Whose situation is tough and dangerous. But they do not lose their dignity. And will never lose it.

At the talks in Belarus, the groups agreed on the first step. To bring back at least one percent of humanity from the normal level. Surrounded cities that are being destroyed and experiencing the worst days. Humanitarian corridors must work today. Mariupol and Volnovakha. To save people. Women, children, the elderly. To give food and medicine to those who remain. Our help is already on the way. Everyone who needs help should be able to leave. Those who are willing. Everyone who can defend their city must continue to fight. Must. Because if everyone leaves, then whose city will it be?

We are doing everything - on our part - to make the agreement work. This is one of the main tasks for today. Let's see if we can go further. In the negotiation process.

Let’s pray for our military. Let’s help our civilians.

Let’s work for peace.

You are now at the height of your spirit. At the maximum of possibilities. Every soldier on the lines of defense. Every doctor who saves lives. Every firefighter who extinguishes fire. Every entrepreneur who continues to work. Dozens and dozens of other professions. Millions of people, which became one whole. Superpower of the spirit.

Programmers who joined the information troops. Everyone who joined the territorial defense. Teachers and educators who do not leave children. Police officers. Civil servants. We all withstood the blow together. We will all rebuild our state together.

What gives us this confidence? Where is it from? It's not just words. It's not just faith. This is our reality. Unconditional reality. Which is fueled by the energy of our people everyday. Our resistance. Our protest.

Kherson. Melitopol. Berdyansk. Konotop. The reality of all cities and towns, rural communities that expel the invaders everyday. By their determination. By their unity.

Freedom Square in Kherson is the whole of Ukraine. The streets of Konotop, where locals are shouting at the invaders, are Ukraine.

Ukraine, which we know, love, protect and will not give up to any enemy.

It is a special heroism to protest when your city is occupied. Even temporarily. When you don't have a weapon and in response you receive gunshots. And you don't run. When you don't have armor and an armored personnel carrier is coming at you. And you do not move aside.

That is why the occupation is temporary! It is artificial.

Our people, our Ukrainians do not retreat. Do not give up. Do not stop the resistance. They shout to the occupiers - go home. Like a Russian ship!

They drive them away from our territory. They block the roads for them. Every meter of our Ukrainian land won by protest and humiliation of the invaders is a step forward, a step towards victory for our entire state. This is a chance to live.

Ukrainians! In all our cities where the enemy entered. Feel it. Go on the offensive! You need to go outside! You have to fight! Every time when there is an opportunity. As in Kherson. As in Berdyansk. As in Melitopol. As in Konotop. You need to go out and drive this evil out of our cities. To prevent the creation of new DPR and LPR where normal life is simply impossible. Only slavery. Only on the knees.

Donbas! Remember what they said about you: Nobody put Donbas on its knees! And no one will be able to do that! Everyone in Donetsk and Luhansk knows these words. They were often repeated. Earlier. What about today?

Donbas, today is the time! We appeal to all people in the temporarily occupied territory. To all who hear us. Whose memory has not been erased by propaganda. Whose eyes have not been closed by fear. Whose soul has not been mutilated by cynicism.

Fight for your rights! For your freedom. For Ukraine. Together with Kherson. Together with Berdyansk. Together with Kyiv and all other Ukrainian cities that value life and are not afraid of anything.

I know that many of you believed that Ukraine allegedly hates you.

Will allegedly attack you. Will allegedly destroy you.

Liars on Russian TV talk about it every day.

Liars. It's their job to lie to you every day. But this should not be your destiny.

Just compare Donetsk after 8 years of war and Kharkiv after 8 days of war.

You were told that we are destroying cities. Look at Kharkiv. At Chernihiv. At 500 kg bombs that were dropped on the houses of Ukrainians. They were killing us. They were killing children. Look at Borodyanka. Look at the destroyed schools. At the blown up kindergartens. At the damaged Kharkiv Assumption Cathedral. Look what Russia has done.

It did it right in front of your eyes. Protect yourself! Otherwise, it will take your life, too. Your houses. Ukraine does not shoot its people. We do not blow up residential buildings. And everyone in Donbas has always been and will be our people. Our citizens.

In Donetsk. Luhansk. Kherson. Berdyansk. Melitopol. Konotop. In all our cities. In all cities of our state. In Ukraine.

I will start with the words of support I hear from our partners. From our friends. Very important words of support backed by concrete steps.

Every day and every night I talk to the leaders of many countries, to the leaders of the business community. During all the days of the war, there is almost no hour when Ukraine does not hear what help it will receive.

I talked about it again with President Biden last night. I am grateful to him for his determination. For preparing more new solutions for Ukrainians and Europeans. More new sanctions against aggression!

And before that I spoke with American congressmen. More than two hundred representatives of both parties of the Congress. They are very sincere. They are fully interested in really helping us, providing concrete assistance.

These are conversations that increase our confidence. Because one who is on the side of light will never fall into darkness.

The world has the power to close our sky from Russian missiles. From Russian combat aircraft, helicopters.

If anyone still doubts, Ukraine needs planes. In fact, it's simple. When you have the will. To make the sky safe. The sky of Ukraine. The sky of Europe.

I spoke with the Prime Minister of Australia. And I am grateful to Australians for their moral stance on Russian exports. There must be no port where a terrorist state can make money.

The Prime Ministers of Albania, Bulgaria and Israel. Support for Ukraine.

Inspirational conversation with Elon Musk. With a man who creates rockets for the future. Instead of killing with rockets for the sake of the past. We talked about how to win now. About how we will cooperate later. After the victory.

Support for Ukraine from global business, from the leaders of the most advanced companies is no less important than support from leading countries. When the corporate world stands by you and is not afraid, you have double protection. Triple weaponry. You have a future.

Ukrainians!

We have already gained our future.

But we are still fighting for our present. It is very important. We are fighting for where the border will be. Between life and slavery.

And this is not only our choice.

The citizens of Russia are making exactly the same choice right now. These days. During these hours.

Between life and slavery. Today. Tomorrow. In the coming week.

This is the time when it is still possible to defeat evil without irreparable losses.

When for a position they threaten with dismissal or a paddy wagon, not with the Gulag. With material losses but not with execution.

Don't miss this opportunity. Social networks, friends, acquaintances, colleagues and relatives. You must be heard! We, Ukrainians, want peace!

Citizens of Russia! For you, this is a struggle not only for peace in Ukraine! This is a fight for your country. For the best it had. For the freedom that you have seen. For the wealth that you have felt.

If you keep silent now, then only your poverty will speak for you later. And only repression will answer it.

Do not be silent!

The Russian servicemen who were taken captive by our defenders started speaking. Hundreds and hundreds of prisoners. Among them are the pilots of the planes that bombed our cities. Our peaceful people. We heard their testimony. We saw the documents. Maps. Plans. Elaborated NOT yesterday.

This is NOT improvisation. This is war.

They prepared this invasion exactly this way - cruelly, cynically. Сonsciously violating the rules of war. Therefore, Kharkiv. Therefore, Chernihiv. Therefore, Sumy. Therefore, Mariupol. And many, many other Ukrainian hero cities have faced pure evil. Atrocity.

This was planned.

But this will not kill our humanity.

Despite everything, we treat war prisoners under the Geneva Convention. Despite everything, our missiles do not hit Russian civilian facilities in response. Or Belarusian. From where rockets fly to our territory every day. Columns of military equipment. Aviation. Against peaceful people. Against peaceful cities. Zhytomyr, Korosten, Ovruch, suburbs of Kyiv, cities in the south... They are preparing to bomb Odesa.

Odesa!

Russians have always come to Odesa. They have always felt only warmth in Odesa. Only sincerity. And now what? Bombs against Odesa? Artillery against Odesa? Missiles against Odesa?

It will be a war crime.

It will be a historical crime.

Ukrainians!

We have been fighting for 11 days. For freedom. For the state.

We withstood. We already understand how we will rebuild our country.

We are already forming special funds for reconstruction. There are already four of them.

Fund for the Restoration of Destroyed Property and Infrastructure. Fund for Economic Recovery and Transformation. Public Debt Service and Repayment Fund. Small and Medium Business Support Fund.

And many more programs to support our people. Heroes who fight for our state.

And this is just the beginning.

And now we still need strength.

Wisdom.

Will.

Victory.

Peace!

Peace to save Ukraine.

Today is Forgiveness Sunday. A day when we always apologized. To each other. To all people. To God. But today, it seems, many have not mentioned this day at all. Have not mentioned the obligatory words: "Forgive me." And the obligatory answer: "God forgives, and I forgive." These words seem to have lost their meaning today. At least in part. After everything we went through.

We will not forgive the destroyed houses. We will not forgive the missile that our air defense shot down over Okhmatdyt today. And more than five hundred other such missiles that hit our land. All over Ukraine. Hit our people and children.

We will not forgive the shooting of unarmed people. Destruction of our infrastructure.

We. Will. Not. Forgive. Hundreds and hundreds of victims. Thousands and thousands of sufferings. And God will not forgive. Not today. Not tomorrow. Never. And instead of Forgiveness, there will be a Day of Judgment.

I'm sure of it.

It seems everything Russian servicemen have already done is still not enough for them. Not enough ruined destinies. Mutilated lives. They want to kill even more.

Tomorrow Russia has officially announced the shelling of our territory. Our enterprises. Defense complex. Most were built decades ago. By the Soviet government. Built in cities. And now they are in the middle of an ordinary urban environment. Thousands of people work there. Hundreds of thousands live nearby.

This is murder. Deliberate murder.

And I have not heard a reaction from any world leader today. From any Western politician. Reaction to this announcement. Think about the sense of impunity of the invaders: they announce their planned atrocities. Why?

Because there is no reaction. Because there is silence. Not a word, as if Western leaders have dissolved tonight. For this day. I hope that at least tomorrow you will notice it. React. Say something. We know exactly who prepared this attack. We know exactly how orders will follow the vertical command. We know everything.

And we will not forgive anything. The Tribunal is waiting for you. And God's judgment, if you try to hide.

The audacity of the aggressor is a clear signal to the West that sanctions against Russia are not enough. Because they didn't understand. Did not feel. They did not see that the world is really determined. Really determined to stop this war. You will not hide from this reality.

You will not hide from new murders in Ukraine.

There was a lot of talk about humanitarian corridors. There were talks every day about the opportunity for people to leave the cities where Russia came. Russian military.

I am grateful to every Ukrainian who stays to defend our cities, even in the encirclement. Our freedom.

But I also know that there are people who really need to get out. Who cannot stay. And we heard the promise that there would be humanitarian corridors. But there are no humanitarian corridors.

Instead of humanitarian corridors, they can only make bloody ones.

A family was killed in Irpen today. A man, a woman and two children. Right on the road. As in the shooting club. When they were just trying to get out of town. To escape.

The whole family. How many such families have died in Ukraine! We will not forgive. We will not forget.

We will punish everyone who committed atrocities in this war. On our land. We will find every bastard. Which shot at our cities, our people. Which bombed our land. Which launched rockets. Which gave the order and pressed "start".

There will be no quiet place on this earth for you. Except for the grave.

Today I decided to award orders to the heads of regional administrations and mayors who have excelled in the defense of their communities.

The Order of Bohdan Khmelnytsky of the Third Degree is awarded to:

Head of Kharkiv Regional State Administration Oleh Vasyliovych Syniehubov.

Head of Mykolaiv Regional State Administration Vitalii Oleksandrovych Kim.

Head of Donetsk Regional State Administration Pavlo Oleksandrovych Kyrylenko.

Head of Luhansk Regional State Administration Serhiy Volodymyrovych Haidai.

Head of Chernihiv Regional State Administration Vyacheslav Anatoliyovych Chaus.

Head of Sumy Regional State Administration Dmytro Oleksiyovych Zhyvytskyi.

The Order of Courage is awarded to:

Mayor of Kharkiv Ihor Oleksandrovych Terekhov.

Mayor of Mykolaiv Oleksandr Fedorovych Senkevych.

Mayor of Chernihiv Vladyslav Anatoliyovych Atroshenko.

Mayor of Sumy Oleksandr Mykolayovych Lysenko.

Mayor of Kherson Ihor Viktorovych Kolykhayev.

Mayor of Melitopol Ivan Serhiyovych Fedorov.

Mayor of Nova Kakhovka Volodymyr Ivanovych Kovalenko.

And I decided to award a special title to our heroes, our hero cities. As it has already been once. When we withstood another attack. But a similar attack.

Another invasion. But no less brutal invasion.

Hero cities will be: Kharkiv. Chernihiv. Mariupol. Kherson. Hostomel. Volnovakha

These words of mine will be addressed to the citizens of Belarus.

Today, all of you are called to the polls to vote in the referendum. This could look like a normal political process. But now it certainly cannot be anything normal.

Now decisions are made on a completely different level.

Last night in Ukraine was cruel. More shelling. More bombing of residential areas, civilian infrastructure. Today there is not a single object in the country that the invaders would not consider a valid target for themselves. They fight against everyone. They fight against everything that’s alive - against kindergartens, against residential buildings and even against ambulances. They use rocket artillery, missiles against entire urban areas in which there has never been any military infrastructure.

Vasylkiv, Kyiv, Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv and many other cities of Ukraine are surviving in conditions that were last seen on our land and your land during the Second World War.

But in the war that is going on now, you are not on the same side with us. Regretfully. From your territory, the troops of the Russian Federation launch rockets into Ukraine. Our children are being killed from your territory, our houses are being destroyed, they are trying to blow up everything that has been built over decades - and, by the way, not only by us, but also by our fathers, our grandfathers.

And all this is also a de facto referendum for you, Belarusians. You decide who you are. You decide who to be. How will you look into the eyes of your children, how will you look into the eyes of each other, your neighbors. And we are your neighbors. We, Ukrainians. Be Belarus, not Russia! You are making this choice right now. Exactly today.

Now there is a lot of news about possible negotiations between Ukraine and Russia, which can end this war and restore peace to all of us. And they often mention your capital. Minsk. As a platform for these negotiations. A place we didn't choose. And, in fact, you did not, too.The leadership of Russia chose it. And now, there is an offer to meet there again.

Four days ago, cruise missiles, planes, helicopters and equipment came from Belarusian territory. They hit our homes, they hit our lives. The heavy equipment followed. And this is a dreadful deja vu. You know, Kyiv was attacked at 4 am. Someone has such a sense of humor, just as in 1941. You slept, Belarusian brothers. And we woke up. But you are still sleeping. And we haven't gone to bed since that moment. Because we are fighting. We are fighting for our country. We are fighting for our freedom. Because we have every right to do so.

If there were no aggressive actions from your territory, we could speak in Minsk. In your city. When you were neutral, we spoke in Minsk, we met many times. This is right. This is truthful. To talk like neighbors. Right now, you haven't made your big choice yet. And it is ahead, it should depend only on you. Not on Russia, not on Ukraine, not on America, but on the people of Belarus.

That is why now we say - not Minsk. The venue for the meeting may be other cities. Of course, we want peace. We want to meet, we want the end of the war! Warsaw, Bratislava, Budapest, Istanbul, Baku - we proposed to the Russian side all of this. Any other city suits us in a country from whose territory missiles are not launched. Only in this way can negotiations be honest. And they can really end the war.

I sincerely wish Belarus to once again become that kind, safe Belarus that everyone saw not so long ago. Make the right choice. I am sure this is the main choice of your great people.

I can start this address with good news. We withstood and successfully repel enemy attacks. The fighting continues. In many cities and districts of our state. But we know what we are defending. The country, the land, the future of children.

Kyiv and key cities around the capital are controlled by our army. The invaders wanted to block the center of our state and put their puppets here, as in Donetsk. We broke their plan. They did not gain any advantage over us.

On our streets, in the skies of Kyiv, in Vasylkiv, in Vyshhorod, even in the surrounding fields, a real battle for Kyiv took place. The enemy used everything against us: missiles, fighter aircraft, drones, artillery, armored vehicles, saboteurs, paratroopers. The invaders are shelling residential neighborhoods, including with the use of missile artillery, trying to destroy energy facilities. They have very treacherous tactics.

Dwellings destroyed by missiles and artillery are the ultimate argument for the world to stop the occupation invasion together with us.

I say this as frankly as possible now: the people of Ukraine have already earned and have the right to become a member of the European Union. This will be the key evidence of our country's support.

It is a crucial moment to close the long-standing strategic discussion once and for all and to decide on Ukraine's membership in the European Union. I discussed this today with Charles Michel, Ursula von der Leyen, Emmanuel Macron.

The anti-war coalition is operating - defense weapons and equipment are heading to Ukraine. We already have almost full support from EU countries for disconnecting Russia from SWIFT. I hope that Germany and Hungary will have the courage to support this decision. We have the courage to defend our homeland, to defend Europe.

In each of our cities, the invaders are being severely rebuffed. Uman, Odesa, Kherson, Mykolaiv, Donbas, Kharkiv, Sumy, Chernihiv, Kyiv - wherever the enemy kills our people, the Armed Forces of Ukraine are doing everything to stop and destroy the invaders. Lviv and other cities in western and central Ukraine that are under air attacks endure firmly. Well done!

Every Ukrainian needs to remember one thing. If you can stop and destroy the invaders, do it. All those who can return to Ukraine, come back to defend Ukraine. And then we will have a lot of work with you to rebuild it!

All those who can defend Ukraine abroad, do it purposefully, unitedly, continuously! All friends of Ukraine who want to join the defense - come, we will give you weapons! All the details of how to implement this will be announced in the near future.

Glory to all those who defend Ukraine today! You are heroes!

I adopted a decision to posthumously award the title of Hero of Ukraine to Vitaliy Volodymyrovych Skakun, a sapper of the 35th Separate Marine Brigade. At the cost of his own life, he blew up the bridge.

And now I want absolutely everyone in Russia to hear me. Thousands of victims. Hundreds of prisoners who simply cannot understand why they were sent to Ukraine. Sent to be killed. The sooner you tell your government that the war must be stopped immediately, the more of your people will remain alive.

We see that there are indeed protests by your citizens against the war. We know that many in Russia are now simply shocked by the meanness and cruelty of the authorities. This is a truly correct response. I thank you for this reaction. Thanks to Leonid Parfyonov, Dmitry Muratov, Yury Dud, Liya Akhedzhakova, Valery Meladze and thousands, thousands of other Russians whose conscience is heard loud. Just stop those who lie to you, lie to us, lie to the whole world. We need to end this war. We can live in peace - in global peace, in human peace.

Our military, national guards, national police, territorial defense, border guards, special services, citizens - hold on! We will defeat everyone. Glory to Ukraine!

Today was a hard yet courageous day. We are fighting for our state absolutely on all frontlines: South, East, North, in many cities of our beautiful country. Fighting around the clock on the diplomatic frontline as well - it's easier to say with whom I did not speak to among world leaders today. We continue this. I have been constantly working and spoke with President Macron, Scholz, Rutte, Mrs. von der Leyen, President of the United States Biden. I outlined what answer Ukrainians still expect from the West to this aggression and agreed on new assistance, new support, significant assistance for our state. I thank all the leaders and I am separately grateful to President Biden.

I was really glad to see the news from friendly Georgia. I want to thank the good, beautiful Georgian people who went out on the streets of their country and supported Ukraine. You are true friends! Thanks.

Our main goal is to end this slaughter. The enemy suffers very-very serious losses. These are hundreds, hundreds of killed soldiers who crossed our border, who came to our land.

We suffer losses as well, unfortunately. Ukrainians resist the aggression heroically. It is impossible to justify. Therefore, the invaders have to come up with more and more absurd accusations to say at least something.

I am convinced that these allegations are biased, nobody will believe them. Ukrainians won’t believe them, the world won’t believe them, citizens of the Russian Federation won’t believe them.

It's simply cannot be such a truth that could clarify why kindergartens and housing infrastructure are fired from a missile artillery. In Vorzel, Kyiv region, they fired "Grads" at an orphanage. Okhtyrka, Sumy region, was shelled by "Uragans". Housing quarters, shelter, kindergartens were under the shelling. What is this war against Ukrainian children in a kindergarten? Who are they? Are they neo-Nazis from kindergarten as well? Or were they NATO soldiers that threatened Russia? Killed and injured children are the sentence to this invasion.

Everyone, I emphasize, everyone must do everything they can to stop this war. Every day of aggression destroys normal life not only in Ukraine, but also in Russia, and in Europe, in the world.

Europeans do not imagine yet what it is like to live when there is such a confrontation next to you. I have to say absolutely frankly: this night will be harder than a day. Many cities of our state are under attack. Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv, our boys, our girls in Donbas, cities of the south of Ukraine. Kyiv requires special attention. We cannot lose the capital.

I appeal to our defenders on all frontlines. This night the enemy will use all the forces available to break our resistance. Treacherously, viciously, inhumanly. This night they will make an assault upon us. We all have to understand what we are going to face. This night we have to withstand. The fate of Ukraine is now being decided. Each civilian should be as careful as possible. Help, please, each other, especially elderly people, lonely, those for whom it is very difficult now. In case of any danger go to the shelter.

Everyone who has already joined the country's defense or can help defend, stop the enemy everywhere you can. Remove special signs that saboteurs leave on the roads and buildings. Burn the enemy’s equipment with anything you can. If even kindergartens are a permissible target for invaders, you must not leave them any chance.

All thoughts, all prayers of Ukrainians are with our military. We believe in them, take care of them. Defend our state. The night will be tough, very tough. But the morning will come

Chancellor of Germany Olaf Scholz yesterday said Russia's invasion of Ukraine is something Europe has not seen for 75 years. And it's true. But this is not the whole truth.

This is not just Russia's invasion in Ukraine, this is the beginning of the war against Europe. Against the unity of Europe. Against elementary human rights in Europe. Against all coexistence rules on the continent. Against the fact that European states refuse to divide, yes, to divide the borders by force.

The cities of Ukraine undergo rocket bombing for the second day already. Tank columns and air strikes are as similar as something Europe has already seen a long time ago - during the Second World War and talked "never again" about it. But this is it! Again. Now. In 2022. 75 years after the Second World War completion.

I’m confident you see it - all of you, entire Europe. But we do not see in full what you are going to do. How are you going to protect yourself when you help us so slowly in Ukraine?

I’d like to point out what has already happened. And for this we are grateful. Sectoral sanctions. The United States, Canada, United Kingdom, the European Union, Australia and New Zealand introduced precisely sectoral sanctions against Russia. In particular, against all the largest banks. Against the largest Russian enterprises. Against Russia's access to Western technologies.

But Russian tanks are still shooting at residential buildings in our cities. Armored vehicles are still attacking, including civilians. Ordinary citizens of Ukraine.

Europe has sufficient force to stop this aggression. What to expect from European states further?

Cancellation of visas for Russians? Cutting off Swift? Full isolation of Russia? Recalling ambassadors? Oil embargo? Closure of the sky? Today, all this should be on the table, because it is a threat to us, all of us, all of Europe. You can still stop aggression. We must act without delay.

Ordinary people can also do their part of the job, I'm sure, in every country of the world, in each country of Europe. Go out on the square of your cities and demand peace for Europe, peace for Ukraine, stop this war. Go out, go out on the squares and demand to stop the war. This is our right. This is your right.

When bombs fall in Kyiv, this happens in Europe, not only in Ukraine. When missiles kill our people, it's the death of all Europeans. Require more protection for Europe, more protection for Ukraine - as part of a democratic world.

While state institutions in Europe are in no hurry with really strong decisions, every European in the capital can already come to our embassy and offer assistance. Demand from your governments more financial, more military assistance to Ukraine. For this help is a help to you. For it is a help to Europe. You help yourself.

If you have a combat experience in Europe and do not want to look at the indecision of politicians, you can arrive in our state and protect Europe with us where it is now urgently required.

You have already been blackmailed with gas. Already humiliated. They already want to split and divide you the same way as they are trying to divide Ukraine today.

Protect yourself. Just as we protect yourself.

I want to address Russian Federation President once again. Battles take place all over the territory of Ukraine. Let's sit at the negotiating table. To stop the death of people.

And now I want to address the Armed Forces of Ukraine. Stand firmly. You are all we have. You are everything that protects our state.

The second morning of a large-scale war. At 4 am, Russian forces continued to launch missile strikes on the territory of Ukraine.

They say that civilian objects are not a target for them. This is a lie. In fact, they do not distinguish in which areas to operate.

Just as yesterday, the military and civilians are equally under Russian attack. The purpose of this attack is to put pressure on you, the citizens of Ukraine, to put pressure on our entire society. I emphasize: not just on the government - on all Ukrainians. And today - even more than yesterday.

Our men and women - all defenders of Ukraine - did not allow the enemy to realize the operational plan of invasion on the first day. Ukrainians demonstrate real heroism. The enemy was stopped in most directions. There are fights.

Therefore, Russia's attack continues with the expectation that our forces will be tired. But no one is tired.

Ukraine's air defense forces are protecting our sky. As much as possible. Enemy aircraft operate treacherously over residential areas, including the capital.

Terrible explosions in the morning sky over Kyiv, bombing, hitting a house, fire - all this reminds of the first such attack on our capital, which took place in 1941.

This morning we are defending our state alone, as we did yesterday. The world's most powerful forces are watching from afar.

Did yesterday's sanctions convince Russia? We hear in our sky and see on our earth that this is not enough. Foreign troops are still trying to become more active in our territory.

Only the solidarity and determination of Ukrainians can preserve our freedom and protect the state. The army, border guards, the National Guard, the police, intelligence, the Territorial Defense Forces - everyone performs their tasks to the maximum.

It is very important that today our citizens also demonstrate maximum endurance and mutual support. Take care of your family and loved ones, but do not forget about the people around you. Those who are single, those who are older. Help them with food. Help find shelter when there is an air alarm. Help with access to verified official information.

Stop the enemy wherever you see it. The fate of Ukraine depends only on Ukrainians. No one but ourselves will control our lives. We are on our land, the truth is on our side. It will not be possible to destroy our character. Kalibr missiles are helpless against our freedom.

Russia will still have to talk to us sooner or later. Talk about how to end the fighting and stop this invasion. The sooner the conversation begins, the smaller Russia's losses will be.

Dear citizens of the Russian Federation. As I said, tonight they started bombing residential areas of the hero city of Kyiv. It all reminds me of 1941. To all the citizens of the Russian Federation who come out to protest, I want to say - we see you. This means that you heard us. This means that you begin to trust us. Fight for us. Fight against the war.

Men and women, our defenders! You are brilliantly defending the country from one of the most powerful countries in the world.

Today Russia attacked the entire territory of our state. And today our defenders have done a lot. They defended almost the entire territory of Ukraine, which suffered direct blows. They regain the one that the enemy managed to occupy. For example, Hostomel near Kyiv. This gives more confidence to the capital.

According to preliminary data, unfortunately, we have lost 137 of our heroes today - our citizens. 10 of them are officers. 316 are wounded.

On our Zmiinyi Island, defending it to the last, all the border guards died heroically. But did not give up. All of them will be posthumously awarded the title of Hero of Ukraine.

May the memory of those who gave their lives for Ukraine live forever.

I am grateful to everyone who saves people right now and helps maintain order in the state.

The enemy strikes not only at military facilities, as it claims, but also at civilians. They kill people and turn peaceful cities into military targets. This is vile and will never be forgiven.

I know that a lot of fakes are being produced now. In particular, that I allegedly left Kyiv. I stay in the capital, I stay with my people. During the day, I held dozens of international talks, directly managed our country. And I will stay in the capital. My family is also in Ukraine. My children are also in Ukraine. My family is not traitors. They are the citizens of Ukraine. But I have no right to say where they are now.

According to our information, the enemy marked me as the number one target. My family is the number two target. They want to destroy Ukraine politically by destroying the Head of State.

We also have information that enemy sabotage groups have entered Kyiv. That's why I am asking Kyivites very much: be careful, follow the rules of curfew. I remain in the government quarter together with all those who are necessary for the work of the central government.

No matter how many conversations I had with the leaders of different countries today, I heard a few things. The first is that we are supported. And I am grateful to each state that helps Ukraine concretely, not just in words.

But there is another - we are left alone in defense of our state. Who is ready to fight with us? Honestly - I do not see such. Who is ready to guarantee Ukraine's accession to NATO? Honestly, everyone is afraid.

Today we heard from Moscow that they still want to talk. They want to talk about Ukraine's neutral status.

I tell all the partners of our state: now is an important moment - the fate of our country is being decided. I ask them: are you with us? They answer that they are with us. But they are not ready to take us to the Alliance.

Today, I asked the twenty-seven leaders of Europe whether Ukraine will be in NATO. I asked directly. Everyone is afraid. They do not answer.

And we are not afraid of anything. We are not afraid to defend our state. We are not afraid of Russia. We are not afraid to talk to Russia. We are not afraid to say everything about security guarantees for our state. We are not afraid to talk about neutral status. We are not in NATO now. But the main thing - what security guarantees will we have? And what specific countries will give them?

We need to talk about the end of this invasion. We need to talk about a ceasefire.

But now the fate of the country depends entirely on our army, on our heroes, our security forces, all our defenders. And on our people, your wisdom and the great support of all friends of our country.

Russian forces today brutally shelled Kharkiv with rocket artillery. This is definitely a military crime. A peaceful city. Peaceful residential areas. No military object. Dozens of eyewitness records prove that this is not a separate false shot, it is a conscious destruction of people. Russians knew where they were shooting.

For this crime there will definitely be a tribunal. International. This is a breach of all conventions. No one in the world will forgive you the murder of peaceful Ukrainian people. Here is Ukraine. Here is Europe. Here is 2022. Evil, armed with rockets, bombs and artillery, must be stopped immediately. Destroyed economically. We must show that humanity is able to protect themselves. I believe that it is necessary to consider the full closure of the sky for Russian missiles, airplanes, helicopters. In five days of invasion, already 56 missile strikes have been carried out against Ukraine. 113 cruise missiles were fired. This is their "fraternal friendship". And the world knows what to do. I spoke about this with partners today.

The state committing military crimes against civilians cannot be a member of the UN Security Council. The entrance to all ports, channels, airports in the world must be closed for this state . Such a state must not receive hundreds of billions for energy exports. Buying Russian goods now is to pay money for murdering people.

Peaceful, proud, strong Kharkiv. You have always been such. You will always be such. We will withstand this as well. We will defend Ukraine. We will help everyone affected by inhuman invasion. Chernihiv, Okhtyrka, Sumy, Hostomel, Vasylkiv, Kherson, Mariupol, Donetsk and all other cities and towns of our native country will see a peaceful and safe life. Sincere condolences to all who lost their relatives and loved ones in this war. Eternal memory to those who died. Eternal glory to everyone who defends our freedom!

Before addressing you, I signed a decree on awarding the title of the Hero of Ukraine to twelve our defenders:

Lieutenant Colonel Eduard Mykolayovych Vahorovsky (posthumously). He died saving our aircraft from a missile strike. Gave others the opportunity to take to the air.
Major Dmytro Valeriyovych Kolomiets (posthumously). He rescued his brothers-in-arms, diverted enemy aircraft fire and was shot down by an enemy plane.
Lieutenant Colonel Hennadiy Vasyliovych Matulyak (posthumously). Hostomel. Destroyed the group of enemy equipment.
Lieutenant Vitaliy Anatoliyovych Movchan (posthumously). In an air battle he destroyed two enemy aircraft.
Colonel Oleksandr Yakovych Oksanchenko (posthumously). He died in an air battle, distracting enemy aircraft.
Senior Lieutenant Vyacheslav Denysovych Radionov (posthumously). Thanks to his courageous actions, the entire crew of the brigade's planes took to the air in Vasylkiv, and this saved ours from a missile strike.
Senior Lieutenant Andriy Andriyovych Gerus. Over the city of Kropyvnytskyi he shot down an enemy IL-76, which prevented the landing of Russian troops with weapons.
Brigadier General Dmytro Serhiyovych Krasylnykov, Commander of the Operational and Tactical Group "North". For two days he has been fighting off the continuous assault, saved people and equipment. And did not let the enemy into Kharkiv from the Luhansk region.
Lieutenant Colonel Andriy Mykolayovych Kruhlov. He withdrew the Buk SAM unit from the enemy attacks and personally destroyed two Russian helicopters and one plane.
Colonel Oleksandr Volodymyrovych Mostov. He shot down a Russian IL-76 near Vasylkiv, as well as two Mi-24 helicopters, which prevented the landing of paratroopers and weapons.
Lieutenant General Yuri Ivanovych Sodol. In the battles for Volnovakha, he saved our men from the encirclement and organized a successful counterattack. He brought people out of the enemy’s attack. Defends Mariupol extremely effectively.
Colonel of medical service Eduard Mykolayovych Khoroshun. He personally organized the defense of the besieged military medical center and carried out the evacuation of the wounded.
Now about Kyiv, our beautiful capital, the basis of our state, our security. For an enemy, Kyiv is the key target. They want to break our national statehood. Therefore, the capital is constantly in danger. Three rocket-bombing strikes are carried out only today. TETs-6 is the target. They want to damage a power station and leave our city without light. We did not allow them to break the defense of the capital. And they send saboteurs to us. Constantly. Hundreds. All they are being neutralized.

In addition to defense, we are thinking about the rear as well. Provide people with everything necessary. We formed a round-the-clock coordination headquarters that collects all requests from regional administrations regarding the lack of the most necessary stuff. Products, medicines, fuel, equipment. The headquarters directly finds suppliers that can quickly and qualitatively meet such needs. This is the restoration of supply chains, interrupted by the war.

Today, at the initiative of the Russian side, the first round of negotiations between Ukraine and Russia took place. These negotiations took place against the background of bombing and shelling of our territory, our cities. Synchronization of shelling with a negotiation process could be seen. I believe that Russia is trying to put pressure on us in such a way. Don't waste time. We do not perceive such tactics. Fair negotiations are possible when one side does not hit the other side with rocket artillery precisely at the moment of negotiations.

So far we do not have the result we would like to get. Russia has declared its position. We have outlined positions in response - to end the war. Some signals we received. When the delegation returns to Kyiv, we will analyze what we’ve heard and then determine how to move to the second round of negotiations.

Another thing that is very important to say. We've been waiting 30 years for this. Today I signed an application for Ukraine's membership in the European Union. We have gained the right to be together with everyone in Europe. The application has already been delivered to Brussels, officially registered. The time has come.

Good morning, Ukrainian heroes! The fifth day of Russia's full-scale war against the people of Ukraine. We stand firm. During this time, we have experienced as much as other nations may not have in decades. We have been told for a long time that there is something wrong with Ukrainians in this or that issue. That Ukrainians have to do so-called "homework" for decades. Because of this, we often did not notice what we are really capable of. And now we have shown ourselves to the fullest. And it's inspiring. For everyone.

In every conversation with our partners, I hear sincere respect. Ukrainians have shown the world who we are. And Russia has shown what it has become. Just think about it: during the Russian invasion - in just four days - sixteen Ukrainian children died as a result of the Russian shelling. Sixteen! 45 children were wounded.

Every crime, every shelling that the invaders commit against us, unites us and our partners even more. Russia did not believe in such a solidary and powerful reaction. But Ukrainians have changed that story. The European Union has decided to supply us with weapons. We are grateful. Yesterday I spoke with Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, about further, even stronger steps. Europeans are aware that our soldiers are fighting for our country and, consequently, for the whole of Europe. For peace for all European countries, for the lives of children, for equality, for democracy. And this gives us the full right to do the following.

We appeal to the European Union for Ukraine's immediate accession under a new special procedure. We are grateful to our partners for being with us. But our goal is to be with all Europeans and, most importantly, to be equal. I am confident that is fair. I am confident we deserve it. I am confident that all this is possible.

Yesterday I spoke with the Presidents of Portugal, Lithuania, President of France Emmanuel Macron and President of Poland Andrzej Duda. I am especially grateful to Andrzej Duda for our fruitful work. I spoke with the Prime Ministers of Belgium, Spain and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Boris Johnson. Support of our anti-war coalition is unconditional and unprecedented.

Europe has closed the sky to all Russian planes. Global business refuses any ties with Russian companies. Let's see how this week will end for the Russian currency - what will be the fall of the ruble. As long as this criminal invasion of Ukraine continues, the Russian state is suffering losses as if the war passed through their territory. Do you need all this? Russian mothers, Russian teachers, Russian entrepreneurs, ordinary people. For what?

Four and a half thousand Russian soldiers have already been killed. Why did you all come here? Why do the columns of your armored vehicles go against us? From our Crimea. From Yalta, Yevpatoriya, Sudak, Simferopol... These are not the names of military camps for tankers. Once again: four and a half thousand Russian invaders killed. Throw away your equipment. And leave. Do not believe your commanders. Do not believe your propagandists. Just save your lives. Leave.

We dedicate every hour to strengthening our state. Anyone who can join the fight against the invaders must do so. Therefore, a decision was made - not easy from a moral point of view, but useful from the point of view of our protection. Under martial law, participants in hostilities - Ukrainians with real combat experience - will be released from custody and will be able to compensate for their guilt in the hottest spots of war. All sanctions are lifted from some people who took part in the anti-terrorist operation. The key now is defense.

When I ran for presidency, I said that each of us is the President. Because we are all responsible for our state. For our beautiful Ukraine. And now it turns out that each of us is a warrior. The warrior in his or her own place. And I am confident that each of us will win.
